384                 Progress of Theoretical Physics Supplement No. 176, 2008



            A Short Introduction to Fibonacci Anyon Models

             Simon Trebst,1 Matthias Troyer,2 Zhenghan Wang1 and
                            Andreas W. W. Ludwig3
                               1 Microsoft Research, Station Q,

               University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA
             2 Theoretische Physik, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland
           3 Physics Department, University of California, Santa Barbara,

                                    California 93106, USA

       We discuss how to construct models of interacting anyons by generalizing quantum spin
   Hamiltonians to anyonic degrees of freedom. The simplest interactions energetically favor
   pairs of anyons to fuse into the trivial (“identity”) channel, similar to the quantum Heisenberg
   model favoring pairs of spins to form spin singlets. We present an introduction to the theory
   of anyons and discuss in detail how basis sets and matrix representations of the interaction
   terms can be obtained, using non-Abelian Fibonacci anyons as example. Besides discussing
   the “golden chain”, a one-dimensional system of anyons with nearest neighbor interactions,
   we also present the derivation of more complicated interaction terms, such as three-anyon
   interactions in the spirit of the Majumdar-Ghosh spin chain, longer range interactions and
   two-leg ladders. We also discuss generalizations to anyons with general non-Abelian SU (2)k
   statistics. The k → ∞ limit of the latter yields ordinary SU (2) spin chains.


                                      §1.    Introduction

     While in classical mechanics the exchange of two identical particles does not
change the underlying state, quantum mechanics allows for more complex behav-
ior. In three-dimensional quantum systems the exchange of two identical particles
may result in a sign-change of the wavefunction which distinguishes fermions from
bosons. Two-dimensional quantum systems – such as electrons conﬁned between
layers of semiconductors – can give rise to exotic particle statistics, where the ex-
change of two identical (quasi)particles can in general be described by either Abelian
or non-Abelian statistics. In the former, the exchange of two particles gives rise to
a complex phase eiθ , where θ = 0, π correspond to the statistics of bosons and
fermions, respectively, and θ = 0, π is referred to as the statistics of Abelian anyons.
The statistics of non-Abelian anyons are described by k × k unitary matrices acting
on a degenerate ground-state manifold with k > 1. In general, two such unitary
matrices A, B do not necessarily commute, i.e. AB = BA, or in more mathematical
language, the k × k unitary matrices form a non-Abelian group when k > 1, hence
the term non-Abelian anyons.
     Anyons appear as emergent quasiparticles in fractional quantum Hall states and
as excitations in microscopic models of frustrated quantum magnets that harbor
topological quantum liquids.1)–3) While for most quantum Hall states the exchange
statistics is Abelian, there are quantum Hall states at certain ﬁlling fractions, e.g.
ν = 52 and ν = 12  5 , for which non-Abelian quasiparticle statistics have been pro-
posed,4), 5) namely those of so-called Ising anyons6) and Fibonacci anyons7) respec-
                  A Short Introduction to Fibonacci Anyon Models                      385

tively. Non-Abelian anyons have also generated considerable interest in proposals for
topological quantum computation,8) where braiding of anyons is used to perform the
unitary transformations of a quantum computation. The simplest anyons with non-
Abelian braiding statistics that can give rise to universal quantum computation∗)
are the so-called Fibonacci anyons which we will discuss in detail in this manuscript.
     In the following, we will ﬁrst give a short introduction to the mathematical theory
of anyons, and discuss how to (consistently) describe the degenerate manifold of a set
of (non-interacting) anyons. Having established the basic formalism we will then turn
to the question of how to model interactions between anyons and explicitly construct
matrix representations of generalized quantum spin Hamiltonians. We then discuss
an alternative formulation in terms of non-Abelian SU (2)k anyons. Rounding oﬀ the
manuscript, we shortly review some recent work analyzing the ground-state phase
diagrams of these Hamiltonians.

                                  §2.   Basic theory

2.1. Algebraic theory of anyons
     In general terms, we can describe anyons by a mathematical framework called
tensor category theory. In such a categorical description, anyons are simple objects
in the corresponding tensor categories, and anyon types are the isomorphism classes
of anyons. Here we will not delve into this diﬃcult mathematical subject, but focus
on the theory of Fibonacci anyons, where many simpliﬁcations occur.
2.2. Particle types and fusion rules
     To describe a system of anyons, we list the species of the anyons in the system,
also called the particle types or topological charges or simply labels (and many other
names); we also specify the anti-particle type of each particle type. We will list the
particle types as {xi }n−1
                       i=0 , and use {Xi }i=0 to denote a representative set of anyons,
                                           n−1

where the type of Xi is xi .
     In any anyonic system, we always have a trivial particle type denoted by 1, which
represents the ground states of the system or the vacuum. In the list of particle types
above, we assume x0 = 1. The trivial particle is its own anti-particle. The anti-
particle of Xi , denoted as Xi∗ , is always of the type of another Xj . If Xi and Xi∗ are
of the same type, we say Xi is self-dual.
     To have a non-trivial anyonic system, we need at least one more particle type
besides 1. The Fibonacci anyonic system is such an anyonic system with only two
particle types: the trivial type 1, and the nontrivial type τ . Anyons of type τ are
called the Fibonacci anyons. Fibonacci anyons are self-dual: the anti-particle type
of τ is also τ . Strictly speaking, we need to distinguish between anyons and their
types. For Fibonacci anyons, this distinction is unnecessary. Therefore, we will refer
to τ both as an anyon and its type, and no confusion should arise.
     Anyons can be combined in a process called the fusion of anyons, which is similar

   ∗)
      Roughly speaking, a universal quantum computer is a general-purpose quantum computer
which is capable of simulating any program on another quantum computer.
386                 S. Trebst, M. Troyer, Z. Wang and A. Ludwig

to combining two quantum spins to form a new total spin. Repeated fusions of the
same two anyons do not necessarily result in an anyon of the same type: the resulting
anyons may be of several diﬀerent types each with certain probabilities (determined
by the theory). In this sense we can also think of fusion as a measurement. It follows
that given two anyons X, Y of type x, y, the particle type of the fusion, denoted as
X ⊗ Y , is in general not well-deﬁned.
    Given an anyon X, if the fusion of X with any other anyon Y (maybe X itself)
always produces an anyon of the same type, then X is called an Abelian anyon. If
neither X nor Y is Abelian, then there will be anyons of more than one type as
the possible fusion results. When such fusion occurs, we say that the fusion has
multi-fusion channels.
    Given two anyons X, Y , we formally write the fusion result as X ⊗ Y ∼      = ⊕i ni Xi ,
where Xi are all anyons in a representative set, and ni are non-negative integers.
The non-negative integer ni is called    the multiplicity of the occurrence of anyon Xi .
Multi-fusion channels correspond to i ni > 1. Given an anyonic system with anyon
representative set {Xi }n−1                              ∼ n−1 k
                           i=0 , then we have Xi ⊗ Xj = ⊕k=0 Ni,j Xk , or equivalently,
xi ⊗ xj = ⊕n−1    k                                       k
             k=0 Ni,j xk . The non-negative integers Ni,j are called the fusion rules of
the anyonic system. If Ni,j  k = 0, we say the fusion of X and X to X is admissible.
                                                            i       j     k
    The trivial particle is Abelian as the fusion of the trivial particle with any other
particle X does not change the type of X, i.e., 1 ⊗ x = x for any type x.
    For the Fibonacci anyonic system the particle types are denoted as 1 and τ , and
the fusion rules are given by:

                                     1⊗τ =τ,
                                     τ ⊗1=τ,
                                     τ ⊗τ =1⊕τ,

where the ⊕ denotes the two possible fusion channels.
2.3. Many anyon states and fusion tree basis
     A deﬁning feature of non-Abelian anyons is the existence of multi-fusion chan-
nels. Suppose we have three τ anyons localized in the plane, well-separated, and
numbered as 1, 2, 3. We would like to know when all three anyons are brought to-
gether to fuse, what kinds of anyons will this fusion result in? When anyons 1 and 2
are combined, we may see 1 or τ . If the resulting anyon were 1, then after combin-
ing with the third τ , we would have a τ anyon. If the resulting anyon were τ , then
fusion with the third anyon would result in either 1 or τ . Hence the fusion result is
not unique. Moreover, even if we ﬁx the resulting outcome as τ , there are still two
possible fusion paths: the ﬁrst two τ ’s were fused to 1, then fused with the third τ
to τ , or the ﬁrst two τ ’s were fused to τ , then fused with the third τ to τ . Each such
fusion path will be recorded by a graphical notation of the fusion tree, see Fig. 1.
     A fusion path is a labeling of the fusion tree where each edge is labeled by a
particle type, and the three labels around any trivalent vertex represent a fusion
admissible by the fusion rules. If not all particles are self-dual, then the edges of
the fusion tree should be oriented. We always draw anyons to be fused on a straight
                     A Short Introduction to Fibonacci Anyon Models                              387




                     Fig. 1. Fusion trees of three Fibonacci anyons (top row).


line, and the fusion tree goes downward. The top edges are labeled by the anyons
to be fused, and the bottom edge represents the fusion result and is also called the
total charge of the fused anyons.
      In general, given n τ -anyons in the plane localized at certain well separated
places, we will assume the total charge at the ∞ boundary is either 1 or τ . In
theory any superposition of 1 or τ is possible for the total charge, but it is physically
reasonable to assume that such superpositions will decohere into a particular anyon
if left alone. Let us arrange the n anyons on the real axis of the plane, numbered as
1, 2, · · · , n. When we fuse the anyons 1, 2, · · · , n consecutively, we have a fusion tree
as below:




    The ground-state manifold of a multi-anyon system in the plane even when
the positions of the anyons are ﬁxed might be degenerate: there is more than one
ground state (in reality the energy diﬀerences between the diﬀerent ground states
go to 0 exponentially as the anyon separations go to inﬁnity; we will ignore such
considerations here, and always assume that anyons are well separated until they
are brought together for fusion). Such a degeneracy is in fact necessary for non-
Abelian statistics to occur. How can we describe a basis for this degenerate ground
state manifold?
    As we see in the example of three τ anyons, there are multi-fusion paths, which
are represented by labelings of the fusion tree. We claim that these fusion paths
represent an orthonormal basis of the degenerate ground-state manifold.∗)
    ∗)
       We will not further justify this assertion, but mention that in the conformal ﬁeld theory (CFT)
description of fractional quantum Hall liquids the ground states can be described by conformal
blocks, which form a basis of the modular functor. Conformal blocks are known to be represented
by labeled fusion trees, which we refer to as fusion paths.
388                   S. Trebst, M. Troyer, Z. Wang and A. Ludwig




Fig. 2. (color online) The two fusion trees of three anyons that both result in the same anyon d are
    related by an “F -move”.


     The fusion tree basis of a multi-anyon system then leads to a combinatorial
way to compute the degeneracy: count the number of labelings of the fusion tree or
equivalently the number of fusion paths. Consider n τ -anyons in the plane with total
charge τ , and denote the ground state degeneracy as Fn . Simple counting shows that
F0 = 0 and F1 = 1. Easy induction then gives Fn+1 = Fn + Fn−1 . This is exactly
the Fibonacci sequence, hence the name of Fibonacci anyons.
     As alluded to above, when two τ anyons are fused, 1 and τ each occur with a
certain probability. This probability is given by the so-called quantum dimension of
an anyon. Consider the fusion coeﬃcients Ni,j    k of a theory, if we regard the particle

types xi as variables and the fusion rules as equations for xi . Then in a unitary
theory the solutions di of xi which are ≥ 1 are the quantum dimensions of the
anyons of type xi . di is also the Perron-Frobenius eigenvalue of the matrix
                                                                           Ni whose
                    k
(j, k)-th entry is Ni,j . We also introduce the total quantum order D =            2
                                                                                i di . The
quantum dimension of the trivial type 1 is always d0 =    √ 1. In the Fibonacci theory,
                                                        1+ 5
the quantum dimension of τ is the golden ratio ϕ = 2 . When two τ anyons fuse,
the probability to see 1 is p0 = ϕ12 , and the probability to see τ is p1 = ϕϕ2 = ϕ1 .
2.4. F-matrices and pentagons
     In the discussion of the fusion tree basis above, we fuse the anyons 1, 2, · · · , n
consecutively one by one from left to right, e.g., n = 3 gives the left fusion tree
below. We may as well choose any other order for the fusions. For example, in the
case of three τ ’s with total charge τ , we may ﬁrst fuse the second and third τ ’s, then
fuse the resulting anyon with the ﬁrst τ . This will lead to the fusion tree on the
right as shown in Fig. 2.
     Given n anyons with a certain total charge, then each order of the fusions is
represented by a fusion tree, and the admissible labelings of the respective fusion
trees each constitute a basis of the multi-anyon system.
     The change from the left fusion tree to the right fusion tree in Fig. 2 is called
the F -move. Since both fusion tree bases describe the same degenerate ground state
manifold of 3 anyons with a certain total charge, they should be related by a unitary
transformation. The associated unitary matrix is called the F -matrix. The F -matrix
will be denoted as Fdabc , where a, b, c are the anyons to be fused, and d is the resulting
anyon or total charge (complications from fusion coeﬃcients Ni,j     k > 1 are ignored).

     For more than three anyons, there will be many more diﬀerent fusion trees. To
have a consistent theory, a priori we need to specify the change of basis matrices
for any number of anyons in a consistent way: for example as shown in Fig. 3 the
                  A Short Introduction to Fibonacci Anyon Models                      389




               Fig. 3. (color online) The pentagon relation for the “F -moves”.



left-most and right-most fusion trees of four anyons can be related to each other by
F -moves in two diﬀerent sequences of applications of F -moves.
     Fortunately, a mathematical theorem guarantees that the consistency equations
for the above fusion trees, called the pentagons, are all the equations that need to be
satisﬁed, i.e., all other consistencies are consequences of the pentagons. Note that
the pentagons are just polynomial equations for the entries of the F -matrices.
     To set up the pentagons, we need to explain the consistency of fusion tree bases
for any number of anyons. Consider a fusion tree T , and a decomposition of T
into two sub-fusion trees T1 , T2 by cutting an edge; the resulting new edge of T1 , T2
will also be referred to as edge e. The fusion tree basis for T has a corresponding
decomposition: if xi ’s are the particle types of the theory (we assume they are all
self-dual), for each xi , we have a fusion tree basis for T1 , T2 with the edge e labeled
by xi . Then the fusion tree basis of T is the direct sum over all xi of the tensor
product: (the fusion tree basis of T1 ) ⊗ (the fusion tree basis of T2 ).
     In the pentagons, an F -move is applied to part of the fusion trees in each step.
The fusion tree decomposes into two pieces: the part where the F -move applies, and
the remaining part. It follows that the fusion tree basis decomposes as a direct sum
of two terms: corresponding to 1 and τ .
                                    k solving the pentagons turns out to be a diﬃcult
     Given a set of fusion rules Ni,j
task (even with the help of computers). However, certain normalizations can be
made to simplify the solutions. If one of the indices of the F -matrix a, b, c is the
trivial type 1, we may assume Fda,b,c = 1. In the Fibonacci theory, we may also
assume F1a,b,c = 1. It follows that the only non-trivial F -matrix is Fττ,τ,τ , which is a
2 × 2 unitary matrix.
     There are many pentagons even for the Fibonacci theory depending on the four
390                  S. Trebst, M. Troyer, Z. Wang and A. Ludwig

anyons to be fused and their total charges: a priori 25 = 32. It is easy to see that the
only non-trivial pentagon for F is the one with 5 τ ’s at all outer edges. The pentagon
is a matrix equation for F extended to a bigger Hilbert space. To write down the
pentagon, we need to order the fusion tree basis with respect to the decomposition
above carefully.
     Written explicitly for Fibonacci anyons the pentagon equation reads

                      (Fττ τ c )da (Fτaτ τ )cb = (Fdτ τ τ )ce (Fττ eτ )db (Fbτ τ τ )ea ,   (2.1)

where the indices a, b, c, d, e label the inner edges of the fusion tree as shown in
Fig. 3. There are only a few diﬀerent matrices appearing, of which four are uniquely
determined by the fusion rules

                              F1τ τ τ = Fτ1τ τ = Fττ 1τ = Fττ τ 1 = 1                      (2.2)

in a basis {1, τ } for the labeling on the central edge. The only nontrivial matrix is
Fττ τ τ . Setting b = c = 1 the pentagon equation simpliﬁes to

                                 (Fττ τ τ )11 = (Fττ τ τ )1τ (Fττ τ τ )τ1 ,                (2.3)

which combined with the condition that Fττ τ τ is unitary constrains the matrix, up
to arbitrary phases, to be
                                                         
                         τττ   τττ †       ϕ−1     ϕ−1/2
                        Fτ = Fτ      =                      ,                 (2.4)
                                          ϕ−1/2 −ϕ−1
            √
where ϕ = ( 5 + 1)/2 is the golden ratio.
2.5. R-matrix and hexagons
     Given n anyons Yi in a surface S, well-separated at ﬁxed locations pi , we may
consider the ground states V (S; pi , Yi ) of this quantum system. Since an energy
gap in an anyonic system is always assumed, if two well-separated anyons Yi , Yj
are exchanged slowly enough, the system will remain in the ground states manifold
V (S; pi , Yi ). If |Ψ0 ∈ V (S; pi , Yi ) is the initial ground state, then after the exchange,
or the braiding of the two anyonsYi , Yj in mathematical parlor, the system will be
in another ground state |Ψ1 = i bi ei in V (S; pi , Yi ), where ei is an othonormal
basis of the ground states manifold V (S; pi , Yi ). When |Ψ0 runs over the basis ei ,
we obtain a unitary matrix Ri,j from V (S; pi , Yi ) to itself. In mathematical terms,
we obtain a representation of the mapping class group of the punctured surface S.
If S is the disk, the mapping class group is called the braid group. In a nice basis of
V (S; pi , Yi ), the braiding matrix Ri,j becomes diagonal.
     To describe braidings carefully, we introduce some conventions. When we ex-
change two anyons a, b in the plane, there are two diﬀerent exchanges which are
not topologically equivalent: their world lines are given by the following two pic-
tures, which are called braids mathematically. In our convention time goes upwards.
When we exchange two anyons, we will refer to the right process, which is called the
right-handed braiding. The left process is the inverse, left-handed braiding.
                  A Short Introduction to Fibonacci Anyon Models                   391




     Now a comment about fusion trees is necessary. In our convention, we draw the
fusion trees downwards. If we want to interpret a fusion tree as a physical process
in time, we should also introduce the conjugate operator of the fusion: splitting of
anyons from one to two. Then as time goes upwards, a fusion tree can be interpreted
as a splitting of one anyon into many.
     All the braiding matrices can be obtained from the R-matrices combined with
F -matrices. Let Vca,b be the ground state manifold of two anyons of types a, b with
total charge c. Let us assume all spaces Vca,b are one-dimensional, and ea,b c  is its
fusion tree basis.
     When anyons a and b are braided by Ra,b , the state ea,b
                                                          c in Vc
                                                                  a,b
                                                                      is changed into
              a,b     b,a                  a,b     b,a
a state Ra,b ec in Vc . Since both Ra,b ec and ec are non-zero vectors in a one-
dimensional Hilbert space Vcb,a , they are equal up to a phase, denoted as Rcb,a , i.e,
Ra,b ea,b     b,a b,a         b,a                             b,a
      c = Rc ec . Here, Rc is a phase, but in general, Rc is a unitary matrix.
We should mention that in general Rc is not the inverse of Rca,b . Their product
                                       b,a

involves the twists of particles.




    As we have seen before anyons can be fused or splitted, therefore braidings should
be compatible with them. For example, given two anyons c, d, we may ﬁrst split d
to a, b, then braid c with a followed by braid c with b, or we may braid c and d ﬁrst,
then split d into a, b. These two processes are physically equivalent, therefore their
resulting matrices should be the same. Applying the two operators on the fusion
tree basis ec,d
             m , we have an identity in pictures:




    The same identity can be also obtained as a composition of F -moves and braid-
392                S. Trebst, M. Troyer, Z. Wang and A. Ludwig




          Fig. 4. (color online) The hexagon relation for “R-moves” and “F -moves”.


ings as shown in Fig. 4. It follows the composition of the 6 matrices, hence the
name hexagon, should be the same as the identity. The resulting equations are
called hexagons. There is another family of hexagons obtained by replacing all right-
handed braids with left-handed ones. In general, these two families of hexagons are
independent of each other. Similar to the pentagons, a mathematical theorem says
that the hexagons imply all other consistency equations for braidings.
     Written explicitly for Fibonacci anyons the hexagon equation reads
                                               
                    Rcτ,τ (Fττ τ τ )ca Raτ,τ =   (Fττ τ τ )cb Rττ,b (Fττ τ τ )ba , (2.5)
                                               b

where again the indices a, b, c label the internal edges of the fusion trees as shown
in Fig. 4. Inserting the F -matrix (2.4) and realizing that braiding a particle around
the trivial one is trivial: Rττ,1 = Rτ1,τ = 1 the hexagon equation becomes
                                          τ,τ −1                                
     (R1τ,τ )2 ϕ−1     R1τ,τ Rττ,τ ϕ−1/2         Rτ ϕ + ϕ−2 (1 − Rττ,τ )ϕ−3/2
                                           =                                          ,
     R1τ,τ Rττ,τ ϕ−1/2 −(Rττ,τ )2 ϕ−1            (1 − Rττ,τ )ϕ−3/2 Rττ,τ ϕ−2 + ϕ−1
                                                                                   (2.6)
which has the solution

                           R1τ τ = e+4πi/5 ,       Rττ τ = e−3πi/5 .                  (2.7)

The combined operation of a basis transformation F before applying the R-matrix
is often denoted by the braid-matrix B

                                   B = Fcaτ τ Rτ,τ Fcaτ τ .                           (2.8)
                  A Short Introduction to Fibonacci Anyon Models                             393

Using a basis {|abc } for the labelings adjacent to the two anyons to be braided the
basis before the basis transformation is

                                {|1τ 1 , |τ τ 1 , |1τ τ , |τ 1τ , |τ τ τ }                  (2.9)

and after the basis change to a basis {|ab̃c } using an F matrix the basis is

                                {|111 , |τ τ 1 , |1τ τ , |τ 1τ , |τ τ τ }                  (2.10)

as illustrated here.




    In this representation the F -matrix is given by
                             ⎛                             ⎞
                                1
                             ⎜      1                      ⎟
                             ⎜                             ⎟
                        F =⎜ ⎜          1                  ⎟                               (2.11)
                                                           ⎟
                             ⎝               ϕ −1   ϕ −1/2 ⎠
                                            ϕ−1/2 −ϕ−1

and the R-matrix is

                   R = diag(e4πi/5 , e−3πi/5 , e−3πi/5 , e4πi/5 , e−3πi/5 ).               (2.12)

We ﬁnally obtain for the braid matrix
                  ⎛                                                                         ⎞
                       e4πi/5
                  ⎜               e−3πi/5                                                     ⎟
                  ⎜                                                                           ⎟
 B = F RF   −1
                 =⎜
                  ⎜                            e−3πi/5                                        ⎟.
                                                                                              ⎟
                  ⎝                                         ϕ−1 e−4πi/5      −ϕ −1/2 e −2πi/5 ⎠
                                                           −ϕ−1/2 e−2πi/5        −ϕ−1
                                                                               (2.13)
    With the explicit matrix representations of the basis transformation F and the
braid matrix B, we are now fully equipped to derive matrix representations of Hamil-
tonians describing interactions between Fibonacci anyons.

                                       §3.    Hamiltonians

     Considering a set of Fibonacci anyons we will now address how to model inter-
actions between these anyons. Without any interactions, the collective state of the
anyons will simply be described by the large degenerate manifold described by the
Hilbert space introduced above. If, however, the anyons interact, this degeneracy
will be split and a non-trivial collective ground state is formed. In this section we
will ﬁrst motivate a particular type of interaction, which generalizes the well-known
394                 S. Trebst, M. Troyer, Z. Wang and A. Ludwig

Heisenberg exchange interaction to anyonic degrees of freedom, and then explic-
itly derive various Hamiltonians of interacting Fibonacci anyons that correspond to
well-known models of SU (2) spin-1/2’s.
     Two SU (2) spin-1/2’s can be combined to form a total spin singlet 0 or a total
spin triplet 1, which in analogy to the anyonic fusion rules we might write as

                                   1/2 ⊗ 1/2 = 0 ⊕ 1 .

If the two spins are far apart and interact only weakly, these two states are degen-
erate. However, if we bring the two spins close together a strong exchange will be
mediated by a virtual tunneling process and the degeneracy between the two total
spin states will be lifted. This physics is captured by the Heisenberg Hamiltonian
which for SU (2) spins is given by
                                                            ⎛             ⎞
                                 J                     J            3
     SU (2)                                          2 = ⎝
    HHeisenberg = J     S    j =
                        i · S                  2 − S
                                        Tij2 − Si    j          Πij0 − ⎠ , (3.1)
                                  2                       2             2
                    ij            ij                          ij


where S i and S j are SU (2) spin 1/2’s, Tij = S  i + S j is the total spin formed by
the two spins S  i and S j , a (uniform) coupling constant is denoted as J, and the
sum runs over all pairs of spins i, j (or might be restricted to nearest neighbors on
a given lattice). Of course, the Heisenberg Hamiltonian is just a sum of projectors
Πij0 onto the pairwise spin singlet state as can be easily seen by rewriting the spin
exchange S      j in terms of the total spin Tij . Antiferromagnetic coupling (J > 0)
           i · S
favors an overall singlet state (Tij2 = 0), while a ferromagnet coupling (J < 0) favors
the triplet state (Tij2 = 2).
     In analogy, we can consider two Fibonacci anyons. If the two anyons are far
apart and weakly or non-interacting, then the two states that can be formed by
fusing the two anyons will be degenerate. If, however, the anyons interact more
strongly, then it is natural to assume that the two fusion outcomes will no longer
be degenerate and one of them is energetically favored. We can thus generalize the
Heisenberg Hamiltonian to anyonic degrees of freedom by expressing it as a sum of
projectors onto a given fusion outcome
                                                    
                                  HHeisenberg
                                   Fibonacci
                                              = −J      Πij1 ,                        (3.2)
                                                  ij

where Πij1 is a projector onto the trivial channel.
3.1. The golden chain
     We will now explicitly derive the matrix representations for simple models of
interacting Fibonacci anyons. In the simplest model we consider a chain of Fibonacci
anyons with nearest neighbor Heisenberg interactions as shown in Fig. 6.
This Hamiltonian favors neighboring anyons to fuse into the trivial (1) channel by
assigning an energy −J to that fusion outcome. To derive the matrix representation
in the fusion tree basis we ﬁrst need to perform a basis change using the F -matrix
                     A Short Introduction to Fibonacci Anyon Models                                 395




Fig. 5. (color online) The generalized Heisenberg model: While for two weakly interacting SU (2)
    spin-1/2’s (left panel) the total singlet and triplet states are degenerate, strong interactions will
    lift this degeneracy. The Heisenberg Hamiltonian explicitly opens a gap of the order Δ ∝ J be-
    tween the two states. Applying a similar idea to the eﬀect of interactions between two Fibonacci
    anyons (right panel), a generalized Heisenberg Hamiltonian will energetically distinguish the two
    fusion outcomes.




Fig. 6. (color online) The “golden chain” of pairwise interacting Fibonacci anyons. The interactions
    are indicated by ellipses around the anyons. Our choice of fusion path basis is indicated in the
    right panel.




and then the Hamiltonian is just F Π 1 F with the projector Π 1 given by Π 1 =
diag(1, 0, 0, 1, 0) in the basis (2.10). Written explicitly this becomes


                                       −J (Fcaτ τ )b1 (Fcaτ τ )1b .                               (3.3)
396                  S. Trebst, M. Troyer, Z. Wang and A. Ludwig

The matrix representation in the basis (2.9) then reads
                          ⎛                              ⎞
                              1
                          ⎜      0                       ⎟
                          ⎜                              ⎟
                          ⎜
                       −J ⎜          0                   ⎟.                                     (3.4)
                                                         ⎟
                          ⎝               ϕ −2    ϕ −3/2 ⎠
                                         ϕ −3/2    ϕ −1


3.2. Three-anyon fusion
    For the second model we include longer range interactions, preferring now to
fuse three adjacent anyons into the trivial particle. For this we have to perform two
basis changes to obtain the total charge of three anyons as shown here:




    The basis states of three anyons are given by the labelings of the four edges
|abcd between and adjacent to the three anyons:

           {|1τ τ 1 , |1τ 1τ , |1τ τ τ , |τ 1τ 1 , |τ τ τ 1 , |τ τ 1τ , τ 1τ τ , |τ τ τ τ } .   (3.5)

The ﬁrst matrix is
                     ⎛                                                                 ⎞
                         1
                  ⎜           1                                                      ⎟
                  ⎜                                                                  ⎟
                  ⎜                1                                                 ⎟
                  ⎜                                                                  ⎟
                  ⎜                      ϕ−1       ϕ−1/2                             ⎟
             F1 = ⎜
                  ⎜
                                                                                     ⎟
                                                                                     ⎟          (3.6)
                  ⎜                     ϕ−1/2      −ϕ−1                              ⎟
                  ⎜                                           1                      ⎟
                  ⎜                                                                  ⎟
                  ⎝                                                 ϕ−1       ϕ −1/2 ⎠
                                                                   ϕ−1/2      −ϕ−1

changing to the basis |ab̃cd

           {|1τ τ 1 , |111τ , |1τ τ τ , |τ 1τ 1 , |τ τ τ 1 , |τ τ 1τ , τ 1τ τ , |τ τ τ τ } ,    (3.7)

and then a second basis change with
                       ⎛                                                         ⎞
                          1
                       ⎜     1                                                ⎟
                       ⎜                                                      ⎟
                       ⎜        1                                             ⎟
                       ⎜                                                      ⎟
                       ⎜            1                                         ⎟
                 F2 = ⎜⎜
                                                                              ⎟
                                                                              ⎟                 (3.8)
                       ⎜                           1                          ⎟
                       ⎜                                 ϕ−1       0   ϕ −1/2 ⎟
                       ⎜                                                      ⎟
                       ⎝                                   0       1      0   ⎠
                                                        ϕ −1/2     0   −ϕ−1
                      A Short Introduction to Fibonacci Anyon Models                                 397
                 
           
to a basis ab̃c̃d

            {|1τ 11 , |11τ τ , |1τ τ τ , |τ 1τ 1 , |τ τ τ 1 , |τ 1τ τ , τ τ 1τ , |τ τ τ τ }.        (3.9)

Combined with the projector P3 = diag(1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0) the Hamiltonian matrix
then becomes
                                    ⎛                                                                ⎞
                                        1
                              ⎜              0                                                    ⎟
                              ⎜                                                                   ⎟
                              ⎜                   0                                               ⎟
                              ⎜                                                                   ⎟
                              ⎜                        0                                          ⎟
H3 = −J3 F1 F2 P3 F2 F1 = −J3 ⎜
                              ⎜
                                                                                                  ⎟.
                                                                                                  ⎟
                              ⎜                            0                                      ⎟
                              ⎜                                  ϕ−2          ϕ−2         −ϕ  5/2 ⎟
                              ⎜                                                                   ⎟
                              ⎝                                  ϕ−2          ϕ−2         −ϕ −5/2 ⎠
                                                                −ϕ−5/2       −ϕ−5/2            −ϕ−3
                                                                                                   (3.10)


3.3. Next-nearest neighbor interactions
    Another possibility for longer-range interactions is to fuse two particles at larger
distance. Here we consider the case of next-nearest neighbor interactions. To deter-
mine the fusion result of these two anyons we ﬁrst need to bring them to adjacent
positions by braiding one of the particles with its neighbor as shown here:




In contrast to Abelian particles, such as ordinary spins, for non-Abelian anyons
it matters whether we braid the two anyons clockwise or counter-clockwise, since
the braid matrix (for braiding clockwise) is diﬀerent from its inverse (braiding anti-
clockwise). Indicating the interaction of two anyons by loops around the two, the
two ways of braiding correspond to the anyons fusing above or below the one between
then as shown here:
398                S. Trebst, M. Troyer, Z. Wang and A. Ludwig

Using the same basis as above we obtain for the Hamiltonian for upper and lower
interactions

H2,above = BH1 B −1 = H = F P F =
          ⎛                                                                          ⎞
            0
          ⎜     ϕ−1/2 −r2                                                            ⎟
          ⎜                                                                          ⎟
          ⎜     −r−2 ϕ1/2                                                            ⎟
          ⎜                                                                          ⎟
          ⎜                                                                          ⎟
          ⎜                   ϕ−1/2      −r2                                         ⎟
−J2 ϕ−3/2 ⎜                                                                          ⎟
          ⎜                   −r−2       ϕ1/2                                        ⎟
          ⎜                                                                          ⎟
          ⎜                                       ϕ−1/2        −ϕ−1/2 r4    ϕ−1 r2 ⎟
          ⎜                                                                          ⎟
          ⎝                                     −ϕ−1/2 r−4      ϕ−1/2       ϕ−1 r−2 ⎠
                                                 ϕ−1 r−2        ϕ−1 r2       ϕ−3/2
                                                                                 (3.11)

and

                          H2,below = B −1 H1 B = H2,above
                                                  ∗
                                                          ,                      (3.12)

where B is the braid matrix acting on the ﬁrst two anyone (ﬁrst three labels) and
r = exp(iπ/5). For the symmetrized model containing both terms we have

   H2 = H2,below + H2,above =
       ⎛                                                                         ⎞
         0
       ⎜       2ϕ−2    −ϕ−5/2                                                    ⎟
       ⎜                                                                         ⎟
       ⎜      −ϕ−5/2     2ϕ−1                                                    ⎟
       ⎜                                                                         ⎟
       ⎜                                                                         ⎟
       ⎜                            2ϕ−2     −ϕ−5/2                              ⎟
   −J2 ⎜                                                                         ⎟.
       ⎜                           −ϕ−5/2     2ϕ−1                               ⎟
       ⎜                                                                         ⎟
       ⎜                                               2ϕ−2     −ϕ−1       ϕ−7/2 ⎟
       ⎜                                                                         ⎟
       ⎝                                               −ϕ−1     2ϕ−2       ϕ−7/2 ⎠
                                                       ϕ−7/2    ϕ−7/2      2ϕ−3
                                                                                 (3.13)

    As for SU (2) spin chains, the three-particle interaction can be written as a sum
of nearest and next-nearest neighbor terms: For SU (2) spin-S this is

                 1 + S
           H3 = (S    2 + S
                           3 )2 = 3S(S + 1)1 + 2S
                                                 1 S      1 S
                                                     2 + 2S         2 S
                                                               3 + 2S  3
                                  12     23     13
              = 3S(S + 1)1 + 2H1 + 2H1 + 2H2 ,                                   (3.14)

where the H1ij indicates a nearest neighbor interaction between sites i and j and H2ij
a next-nearest neighbor one. Mapping an H3 chain to a chain containing both H1
                    A Short Introduction to Fibonacci Anyon Models                              399




Fig. 7. (color online) A two-leg ladder model, consisting of two chains of Fibonacci anyons. Pairwise
    interactions are indicated by ellipsis around the anyons. Our choice of fusion path is indicated
    by a line in right panel.


and H2 terms we ﬁnd J1 = 4J3 and J2 = 2J3 . The H3 chain thus corresponds to the
Majumdar-Ghosh chain9) with an exact ground state of singlet dimers.
    Similarly we ﬁnd for Fibonacci anyons

                         H3 = −1 − ϕ−2 H112 − ϕ−2 H123 − ϕ−1 H213                            (3.15)

and thus J1 = −2ϕ−2 J3 and J2 = −ϕ−1 J3 . Again the pure H3 chain corresponds
to the Majumdar-Ghosh chain with an exact ground state of anyonic dimers fusing
into the trivial particle.10)
     Generalizations of the next nearest neighbor interaction to longer distances is
straightforward, the only complication arises from the various possible orientations
of the braids, giving 2r−1 diﬀerent terms at distance r.

3.4. The two-leg ladder
     The ﬁnal model we will present is a two-leg ladder consisting of two coupled
chains. Unlike the case of the chain, where it was natural to just use the standard
fusion tree as basis, there are several natural choices here. Choosing the zig-zag
fusion path indicated by a line in Fig. 7 minimizes the interaction range on the
fusion tree.
     Distinguishing rung interactions with coupling constant J⊥ and chain interac-
tions with coupling J, we see that the rung terms are just nearest neighbor interac-
tions and the chain terms are next nearest neighbor interactions above or below the
other anyon for the upper and lower chain respectively:

                                                                  
          Hladder = J⊥         H12i−1,2i + J        2i−1,2i+1
                                                   H2,below   +J          2i,2i+2
                                                                         H2,above .          (3.16)
                           i                   i                     i

     Having established the explicit matrix representations of these Hamiltonians we
can now analyze their ground states thereby addressing the original question of what
kind of collective ground states a set of Fibonacci anyons will form in the presence
of these interactions.
400                  S. Trebst, M. Troyer, Z. Wang and A. Ludwig

                        §4.   Alternative SU (2)k formulation

      Before turning to the collective ground states of the Hamiltonians introduced
above, we will describe an alternative reformulation of the “golden chain”, Eq. (3.2),
which allows us to generalize the latter and, in particular, allows us to view the
golden chain and its variants as certain deformations of ordinary SU (2) spin chains.
Technically, this generalization is based on connections with the famous work by
Jones13) on representations of the Temperley-Lieb algebra.14)
      Speciﬁcally, this reformulation is based on the fusion rules of the anyon theory
known by the name ‘SU (2) at level k’, which in symbols we denote as SU (2)k , for
k = 3. For arbitrary integer values of the parameter k there exist particles labeled by
‘angular momenta’ j = 0, 1/2, 1, 3/2, ..., k/2. The result of fusing two particles with
‘angular momenta’ j1 and j2 yields particles with ‘angular momenta’ j where j =
|j1 − j2 |, |j1 − j2 | + 1, ..., min{j1 + j2 , k − (j1 + j2 )}, each occurring with multiplicity
Njj1 j2 = 1. When k → ∞ this represents ordinary SU (2) spins, for which all possible
values of (ordinary) SU (2) angular momenta j = 0, 1/2, 1, 3/2, .... appear, and the
fusion rule turns into the ordinary angular momentum coupling rule. Finite values
of k represent a ‘quantization’ of SU (2), amounting to the indicated truncation of
the range of ‘angular momenta’. Thus, our reformulation will allow us to view the
“golden chain” as a deformation of the ordinary SU (2) Heisenberg spin chain by a
parameter 1/k. For the special case where 1/k = 1/3 we obtain, as we will now
brieﬂy review, the chain of Fibonacci anyons introduced in Eq. (3.2) above.
      Our reformulation of the “golden chain” is based on two simple observations:
(i) ﬁrst, one recalls that at k = 3 (where the four particles j = 0, 1/2, 1, 3/2 exist)
the fusion rule of the particle with j = 1 is 1 ⊗ 1 = 0 ⊕ 1 (all entries label ‘angular
momenta’), which is identical to that of the Fibonacci anyon τ , e.g. τ ⊗ τ = 1 ⊕ τ .
Note that the trivial particle, previously denoted by 1, is now denoted by ‘angular
momentum’ j = 0. (ii) Secondly, we recall that the particle j = 3/2 can be used
to map the particles one-to-one into each other (it represents what is known as an
automorphism of the fusion algebra), i.e.

       3/2 ⊗ 0 = 3/2,      3/2 ⊗ 1/2 = 1,     3/2 ⊗ 1 = 1/2,      3/2 ⊗ 3/2 = 0.          (4.1)

We denote this automorphism by

                                 3/2 ⊗ j = ĵ :       j → ĵ .                            (4.2)

Note that when j is an integer, then ĵ is a half-integer, and vice-versa.
                   A Short Introduction to Fibonacci Anyon Models                       401

    Using the observation (i) above we may ﬁrst write an arbitrary state vector in
the Hilbert space which can be represented pictorially as




                                                                           ,

in the new notation using the ‘angular momenta’ as follows :




                                                                           .

     Let us now consider the matrix element of the projector [discussed in Eqs. (3.2)
   .
–(3 4) above]
                                ...a , b , c ...|Π 1 |...a, b, c... ,              (4.3)

where ...a , b , c , ...a, b, c, ... ∈ {j = 0, j = 1}. A moment’s reﬂection shows that in
fact a = a and c = c. This matrix element is graphically depicted in the leftmost
picture in Fig. 8, where the direction from the right (ket) to the left (bra) in (4.3) is
now drawn vertically upwards from bottom to top in the ﬁgure.
     We may now perform a number of elementary steps using a 1 × 1-dimensional F -
matrix (which is just a number) involving the Abelian particle j = 3/2. Speciﬁcally,




                  Fig. 8. (color online) Transformation of the projector Π 1 .
402               S. Trebst, M. Troyer, Z. Wang and A. Ludwig

we perform the steps depicted as




on both, the upper and the lower legs of the projector in Fig. 8, where in the last
step we use




Subsequently we use, in the diagram in the middle of the projector equation Fig. 8,
the transformation




where in the ﬁrst step we have applied the relation




The projector Π˜1 with four j = 1/2 particle legs (depicted in the rightmost diagram
of Fig. 8), which we obtain at the end of this sequence of elementary steps is the
central object of interest to us.
                   A Short Introduction to Fibonacci Anyon Models                          403

    As it is evident from the rightmost picture in Fig. 8, the projector Π˜1 acts on
basis states of the form                              
                                              ˆ e, ... ,
                                 ...a, b̂, c, d,                              (4.4)

that is on states in which integer and half-integer labels are strictly alternating. Such
basis states can then be depicted as




                                                                       .
 Fig. 9. ‘Angular momentum’ description of the wavefunction for the Fibonacci theory SU (2)3 .

    The projector Π˜1 that we have thereby obtained is a central and well known
object of study in Mathematics: Speciﬁcally, let us form the operator

                                         ei := d Π˜1 i ,                                  (4.5)
                 √
where d = ϕ = ( 5 + 1)/2 is the golden ratio. The index i indicates the label along
the fusion chain basis of ‘angular momenta’ in (4.4) on which it acts. For example,
the operator Π 1 in (4.3) as drawn in Fig. 8 acts on the label b which is, say, in the i-th
position in the chain of symbols characterizing the state. With these notations, the
operators ei are known to provide a representation of the Temperley-Lieb algebra14)

                                           e2i = d ei ,

                                        ei ei±1 ei = ei ,

                                    [ei , ej ] = 0, |i − j| ≥ 2
                                               √
with d-isotopy parameter d = ϕ = ( 5 + 1)/2. The so-obtained representation of
the Temperley-Lieb algebra is only one in an inﬁnite sequence with diﬀerent values
of the d-isotopy parameter, discovered by Jones.13) Speciﬁcally, in our notations,
this inﬁnite sequence is labeled by the integer k, specifying the d-isotopy parameter
d = 2 cos[π/(k + 2)]. For any integer value of k, the Jones representation is given
by the matrix elements of the operator ei in the basis of type (4.4). Recall from the
discussion at the beginning of this paragraph that for general values of the integer
k the labels ...a, b̂, c... are the ‘angular momenta’ in the set j = 0, 1/2, 1, 3/2, ..., k/2.
Thus it is in general more convenient to write these basis states as

                                    |. . . ji−1 , ji , ji+1 . . .                         (4.6)

with ji−1 , ji , ji+1 ∈ {0, 1/2, 1, 3/2, ..., k/2}; the sequence must satisfy the condition
that ji is contained in the fusion product of ji−1 with an ‘angular momentum’ 1/2,
ji+1 is contained in the fusion product of ji with ‘angular momentum’ 1/2, etc. –
404                     S. Trebst, M. Troyer, Z. Wang and A. Ludwig

this generalizes the states depicted in Fig. 9 (which is written for k = 3). Within
this notation the matrix elements of the operator ei are (compare with (4.3))
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                              Sj0i Sj0
   ...ji−1 , ji , ji+1 ...|ei |...ji−1 , ji , ji+1 ... = δji−1 ,ji−1 δji+1 ,ji+1 δji−1 ,ji+1  0
              
                                                                      
                                                                                                        i
                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                               Sji−1 Sj0i+1
                                                                                                          (4.7)
where                                  
                                               2          (2j + 1)(2j  + 1) 
                               Sjj =                   sin π                        .                     (4.8)
                                            (k + 2)                 k+2
     This, then, deﬁnes a generalization of the original “golden chain”, for which
k = 3, to arbitrary values of k. It is interesting to note that in the limit k → ∞, the
so-deﬁned generalized anyonic chain turns precisely into the ordinary SU (2) spin-
1/2 Heisenberg chain. Therefore, these generalized “golden chains” (for arbirary
integer values of k) provide, as alluded to in the introduction of this section, a
certain generalization of the ordinary SU (2) spin-1/2 Heisenberg chain. Therefore,
it is natural to ask questions about the behavior of ordinary spin-1/2 chains, in
the context of these generalized golden chains. Indeed, as we have described in
various publications10)–12) and as reviewed in this note, many of the physics questions
familiar from the ordinary Heisenberg chain ﬁnd their mirror-image in the behavior
of our generalized golden chains. The following section is intended to give a brief
ﬂavor of these results and parallels.
     Before we proceed, let us brieﬂy mention that for ‘antiferromagnetic’ coupling
of the generalized spins of the golden chain (for general k), meaning that projection
onto the singlet state (trivial anyon fusion channel) between two spins is energetically
favored, one obtains a gapless theory which turns out to be precisely the (k − 1)-th
minimal model of conformal ﬁeld theory15) of central charge c = 1−6/[(k +1)(k +2)].
(For k = 2 this is the Ising model, for k = 3 the tricritical Ising model, and so on.)
In the opposite, ‘ferromagnetic’ case, meaning the case where the projection onto
the ‘generalized triplet’ state of two neighboring generalized spins is energetically
favored, one obtains another well known sequence of gapless models: these are the
Zk parafermionic conformal ﬁeld theories,16) of central charge c = 2(k − 1)/(k + 2),
which have more recently attracted attention in quantum Hall physics as potential
candidates for certain non-Abelian quantum Hall states, known as the Read-Rezayi
states.5) For a summary see Table I.

                                 §5. Collective ground states

    In this ﬁnal section we will round oﬀ the manuscript by shortly reviewing some
recent numerical and analytical work analyzing the collective ground states formed
by a set of Fibonacci anyons in the presence of the generalized Heisenberg interactions
introduced in the previous section.
    For the “golden chain” investigated in Ref. 11) , a one-dimensional arrangement
of Fibonacci anyons with nearest neighbor interaction terms, it has been shown (as
already mentioned above) that the system is gapless – independent of which fusion
                    A Short Introduction to Fibonacci Anyon Models                           405

Table I. The gapless (conformal ﬁeld) theories describing the generalized spin-1/2 chain of anyons
   with SU (2)k non-Abelian statistics.

                    level k               AFM                        FM
                                         c = 1/2                  c = 1/2
                      2
                                           Ising                    Ising
                                        c = 7/10                  c = 4/5
                      3
                                    tricritical Ising          3-state Potts
                                         c = 4/5                   c=1
                      4
                                  tetracritical Ising        Z4 -parafermions
                                         c = 6/7                  c = 8/7
                      5
                                  pentacritical Ising        Z5 -parafermions
                              c = 1 − 6/[(k + 1)(k + 2)]   c = 2(k − 1)/(k + 2)
                      k
                                kth -multicritical Ising     Zk -parafermions
                                          c=1                      c=2
                      ∞
                                  Heisenberg AFM              Heisenberg FM



channel, the trivial channel (1) for antiferromagnetic coupling, or the τ -channel for
ferromagnetic coupling, is energetically favored by the pairwise fusion. The ﬁnite-
size gap Δ(L) for a system with L Fibonacci anyons vanishes as Δ(L) ∝ (1/L)z=1
with dynamical critical exponent z = 1, indicative of a conformally invariant energy
spectrum. The two-dimensional conformal ﬁeld theories describing the system have
central charge c = 7/10 for antiferromagnetic interactions and c = 4/5 for ferro-
magnetic interactions, respectively, corresponding to the entry for k = 3 in Table
I. In fact, a direct connection to the corresponding two-dimensional classical mod-
els, the tricritical Ising model for c = 7/10 and the three-state Potts model for
c = 4/5, has been made: Realizing that (as reviewed brieﬂy in the previous section)
the non-commuting local operators of the “golden chain” Hamiltonian form a well
known representation13) of the Temperley-Lieb algebra14) (with d-isotopy parameter
d = ϕ), it has been shown11) that the Hamiltonian of this quantum chain corresponds
precisely to (a strongly anisotropic version of) the transfer matrix of the integrable
restricted-solid-on-solid (RSOS) lattice model,17) thereby mapping the anyonic quan-
tum chain exactly onto the tricritical Ising and three-state Potts critical points of
the generalized hard hexagon model.11), 18) A corresponding exact relationship holds
in fact true for the chains at any value of the integer k (Table I).
     While this correspondence of the “golden chain” with the special critical points
of the classical models might initially seem accidental, it turns out that the quantum
system exhibits in fact an additional topological symmetry that actually stabilizes the
gaplessness of the quantum system, and protects it from local perturbations which
would generate a gap. In particular, it was shown that all translational-invariant
relevant operators that appear in the quantum system, e.g. the two thermal operators
of the tricritical Ising model (antiferromagnetic case) ,  with scaling dimensions
1/5 and 6/5 respectively, are forbidden by this topological symmetry.11)
     A more detailed connection to the underlying two-dimensional classical models
has been made by considering the eﬀect of a competing next-nearest neighbor in-
teraction or, equivalently, a three-anyon fusion term in the anyonic analog of the
406                   S. Trebst, M. Troyer, Z. Wang and A. Ludwig




Fig. 10. (color online) The phase diagram of the anyonic Majumdar-Ghosh chain, for Fibonacci
    anyons, as presented in Ref. 10). The exchange couplings are parametrized on the circle by
    an angle θ, with a pairwise fusion term J2 = cos θ and a three-particle fusion term J3 = sin θ.
    Besides extended critical phases around the exactly solvable points (θ = 0, π) that can be
    mapped to the tricritical Ising model and the 3-state Potts model, there are two gapped phases
    (grey ﬁlled). The phase transitions (red circles) out of the tricritical Ising phase exhibit higher
    symmetries and are both described by CFTs with central charge 4/5. In the gapped phases
    exact ground states are known at the positions marked by the stars. In the lower left quadrant
    a small sliver of an incommensurate phase occurs and a phase which has Z4 -symmetry. These
    latter two phases also appear to be critical.



Majumdar-Ghosh chain,10) derived explicitly above. The rich phase diagram of this
model is reproduced in Fig. 10. Besides extended critical phases around the “golden
chain” limits (θ = 0, π) for which an exact solution is known, there are two gapped
phases (grey ﬁlled) with distinct ground-state degeneracies and well-deﬁned quasipar-
ticle excitations in the spectrum. The tricritical Ising phase ends in higher-symmetry
critical endpoints, with an S3 -symmetry at θ = 0.176π and an Ising tetracritical point
at θ = −0.472π. The transitions at these points spontaneously break the topological
symmetry and in the case of the tetracritical point also the translational symmetry
thereby giving rise to two-fold and four-fold degenerate ground states in the adjacent
gapped phases, respectively. For an in-depth discussion of this phase diagram we
refer to Ref. 10).
     Finally, the eﬀect of random interactions on chains of (Fibonacci) anyons has
been studied in Refs. 19) and 20). For random, ‘antiferromagnetic’ interactions the
random system is found to ﬂow to strong disorder and the inﬁnite randomness ﬁxed
point is described by a generalized random singlet phase.19) For a ﬁnite density of
‘ferromagnetic’ interactions an additional ‘mixed phase’ inﬁnite randomness ﬁxed
point is found.20)
                  A Short Introduction to Fibonacci Anyon Models                          407

                                  Acknowledgments

    We thank E. Ardonne, A. Feiguin, M. Freedman, C. Gils, D. Huse, and A. Kitaev
for many illuminating discussions and joint work on a number of related publications.
We further acknowledge stimulating discussions with P. Bonderson, N. Bonesteel, L.
Fidkowski, P. Fendley, C. Nayak, G. Refael, S.H. Simon, J. Slingerland, and K. Yang.

                                        References
     1) A. Kitaev, Ann. of Phys. 303 (2003), 2.
     2) A. Kitaev, Ann. of Phys. 321 (2006), 2.
     3) M. Levin and X.-G. Wen, Phys. Rev. B 71 (2005), 045110.
     4) G. Moore and N. Read, Nucl. Phys. B 360 (1991), 362.
     5) N. Read and E. Rezayi, Phys. Rev. B 59 (1999), 8084.
     6) C. Nayak and F. Wilczek, Nucl. Phys. B 479 (1996), 529.
     7) J. K. Slingerland and F. A. Bais, Nucl. Phys. B 612 (2001), 229.
     8) C. Nayak, S. H. Simon, A. Stern, M. Freedman and S. Das Sarma, Rev. Mod. Phys. 80
        (2008), 1083.
     9) C. K. Majumdar and D. K. Ghosh, J. Math. Phys. 10 (1969), 1399.
    10) S. Trebst, E. Ardonne, A. Feiguin, D. A. Huse, A. W. W. Ludwig and M. Troyer, Phys.
        Rev. Lett. 101 (2008), 050401.
    11) A. Feiguin, S. Trebst, A. W. W. Ludwig, M. Troyer, A. Kitaev, Z. Wang and M. Freedman,
        Phys. Rev. Lett. 98 (2007), 160409.
    12) C. Gils, E. Ardonne, S. Trebst, A. W. W. Ludwig, M. Troyer and Z. Wang,
        arXiv:0810.2277.
    13) V. F. R. Jones, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris Sér. I Math. 298 (1984), 505; Invent. Math. 72
        (1983), 1.
        A. Kuniba, Y. Akutsu and M. Wadati, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 55 (1986), 3285.
        V. Pasquier, Nucl. Phys. B 285 (1987), 162.
        H. Wenzl, Invent. Math. 92 (1988), 349.
    14) N. Temperley and E. Lieb, Proc. R. Soc. London A 322 (1971), 251.
    15) A. A. Belavin, A. M. Polyakov and A. B. Zamolodchikov, Nucl. Phys. B 241 (1984), 333.
    16) A. B. Zamolodchikov and V. A. Fateev, Sov. Phys. -JETP 62 (1985), 215.
    17) G. E. Andrews, R. J. Baxter and P. J. Forrester, J. Stat. Phys. 35 (1984), 193.
    18) D. A. Huse, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49 (1982), 1121; Phys. Rev. B 30 (1984), 3908.
    19) N. E. Bonesteel and Kun Yang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99 (2007), 140405.
    20) L. Fidkowski, G. Refael, N. Bonesteel and J. Moore, arXiv:0807.1123.
