                                            OPERATOR-ALGEBRAIC CONSTRUCTION OF GAUGE THEORIES
                                                 AND JONES’ ACTIONS OF THOMPSON’S GROUPS

                                                              ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

                                                  Abstract. Using ideas from Jones, lattice gauge theory and loop quantum gravity, we
                                                  construct 1+1-dimensional gauge theories on a spacetime cylinder. Given a separable
                                                  compact group G, we construct localized time-zero fields on the spatial torus as a net
arXiv:1901.04940v2 [math-ph] 11 Sep 2019




                                                  of C*-algebras together with an action of the gauge group that is an infinite product
                                                  of G over the dyadic rationals and, using a recent machinery of Jones, an action of
                                                  Thompson’s group T as a replacement of the spatial diffeomorphism group.
                                                  Adding a family of probability measures on the unitary dual of G we construct a state
                                                  and obtain a net of von Neumann algebras carrying a state-preserving gauge group
                                                  action. For abelian G, we provide a very explicit description of our algebras. For a single
                                                  measure on the dual of G, we have a state-preserving action of Thompson’s group and
                                                  semi-finite von Neumann algebras. For G “ S the circle group together with a certain
                                                  family of heat-kernel states providing the measures, we obtain hyperfinite type III factors
                                                  with a normal faithful state providing a nontrivial time evolution via Tomita-Takesaki
                                                  theory (KMS condition). In the latter case, we additionally have a non-singular action
                                                  of the group of rotations with dyadic angles, as a subgroup of Thompson’s group T , for
                                                  geometrically motivated choices of families of heat-kernel states.




                                                                                     Introduction
                                           Jones recently discovered a very general process of constructing actions of Thompson’s
                                           groups F ă T ă V and more generally for any group of fractions, see [34, 35]. This dis-
                                           covery arose from an attempt to build a conformal field theory directly from a subfactor
                                           using the formalism of Jones’ planar algebras: Thompson’s group T (a group of local scale
                                           transformations and translations) is seen as a replacement of the positive diffeomorphisms
                                           of the circle that is the classical symmetry group of a chiral conformal field theory. A sim-
                                           ilar construction has been invoked in a particular approach to the canonical quantization
                                           of general relativity, namely loop quantum gravity, to implement in parts the concept of
                                           background independence, i.e. covariance w.r.t. (spatial) diffeomorphisms, see [49, 8, 6]
                                           and references therein. Note that Thompson’s group T is only a weak substitute of the
                                           diffeomorphism group. Indeed, the action of the rotation subgroup of T (rotations with
                                           dyadic rationals for angle) is generically very discontinuous, see [35] and [16] for explicit
                                           computations. This project, which the present article is part of, has been motivated by
                                           the aforesaid similarities between Jones’ machinery and constructions in loop quantum
                                           gravity, in particular the operator-algebraic treatment by one of the authors [45, 46]. As
                                           the latter are partially motivated by classical ideas in lattice gauge theory, see [38, 21], we
                                           start our construction from much simpler representation-theoretical data, i.e. a compact

                                             Both authors were partially supported by European Research Council Advanced Grant 669240 QUEST.
                                           AS was supported by Alexander-von-Humboldt Foundation through a Feodor Lynen Research Fellowship.
                                           AB is supported by a University of New South Wales Sydney starting grant.
                                                                                              1
2                  ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

group, than the more general approach by Jones involving subfactors in a rather differ-
ent direction, see [36]. Nevertheless, this leads to nontrivial results: the construction of
one of the simplest gauge theories, Yang-Mills theory in 1+1 dimensions (YM1`1 ), cf. for
example [55, 44], together with an action by Thompson’s group V or its rotation sub-
group. In this article, we present a precise operator-algebraic construction of the model
and focus on a detailed exposition of mathematical results following closely the notation
used by Jones. In our companion article [17], we give a complementary description of the
construction in the context of lattice gauge theory and focus on physics related aspects of
the model, especially renormalization, and its relation to existing treatments of YM1`1 ,
see [22, 7, 23]. Moreover, we point out that our rather complete operator-algebraic for-
mulation of YM1`1 allows to understand the differences among those previous accounts in
a very precise manner. Our construction also bears certain similarities as well as critical
differences to more recent operator-algebraic treatments of lattice gauge theory [30, 31, 1],
which we explain in detail in our companion article.
Let us give a more detailed summary of the main construction and the article’s content:
Given a separable compact group G (e.g. a compact Lie group), we consider the weakly
dense C*-subalgebra M Ă BpL2 pGqq generated by the continuous function C pGq act-
ing by pointwise multiplications and the group ring CrGs acting by convolution. The
choice of M is driven by the construction of a kinematical C*-algebraic theory and the
necessity of having unital completely positive maps between algebras (a condition that
is natural w.r.t. renormalization and spatial locality, see [17, Sections 2.3 and 4] for de-
tails). If we only desired to have a von Neumann-algebraic model, we could directly pass
to M “ BpL2 pGqq or any weakly dense *-subalgebra, see Remark 3.5. For a standard
dyadic partition (s.d.p. in short) t of the torus R{Z, we define the C*-algebra at level
t as Mt :“ bI M a (minimal) tensor product of copies of M indexed       ś by the intervals I
associated with the partition. This comes along with a gauge group BI G acting on Mt ,
where the product is indexed by the left boundary BI of the intervals. We fix a unital
embedding R : M Ñ M b M which provides unital embeddings ιst : Mt Ñ Ms for s a re-
finement of the partition t, i.e. t ď s. The map R is chosen such that it reflects the group
structure of G, or more precisely the commutation relations between C pGq and CrGs,
and is equivariant w.r.t. the gauge group action. This way, we obtain an inductive-limit
C*-algebra M0 and, using Jones’ machinery, an action of Thompson’s group V on M0
which is one ofśthe main point of our construction. Additionally, we have an action of the
gauge group D G that is the infinite product of G indexed by the dyadic rationals D.
The C*-algebra M0 is precisely described by a (discrete) crossed-product C pA q ¸ ‘D G,
where A can be interpreted as a compact Hausdorff space of generalized connections [4]
and ‘D G is the infinite direct sum of G over the dyadic rationals serving as a space of
compatible conjugate momenta. Additionally,     ś there are explicit formulas for the actions
of Thompson’s group V and the gauge group D G on M0 , see sections 2.4 and 2.5. More-
over, because of the aforementioned unitality, it is possible to localize our construction
w.r.t. connected open subsets O of the torus, thus giving us a net of C*-algebras M0 pOq
corresponding to time-zero fields localized in some region of space. The localization is
realized by considering at each finite level t the C*-subalgebra Mt pOq Ă Mt :“ bI M that
is given by the unital diagonal embedding of the tensor product of M indexed by those
intervals I contained inside O. It follows that the localized algebras are stable under the
action of the gauge group and geometrically covariant w.r.t. Thompson’s group T that is
                         GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                    3

the restriction to V of elements that are homeomorphisms of the torus. Elements of V
only act continuously on the torus up to finitely many points and, thus, vO is not nec-
essarily connected for v P V . The C*-algebraic framework provides a kinematical model
with a notion of (infinitely divisible, homogeneous, Cantor-like) space subject to spatial
covariance given by Thompson’s group T and compatible inner degrees of freedom sub-
ject to the action of the gauge group. Similar to the point of view advocated in [34], we
consider M0 as a semi-continuum limit of field algebras, which fits with the Cantor-like
structure of the dyadic rationals D.
Notably, the net of C*-algebras M0 pOq satisfies axioms similar to those of a conformal
net [28], see Proposition 2.12.
As hinted at above, our choice of unital embeddings ιst : Mt Ñ Ms , t ď s, is partially mo-
tivated by considerations from Wilson’s approach to the renormalization group [53, 54],
see also [27], and, thus, with guidance from the setting of statistical and Euclidean field
theory, we assume that a full continuum limit requires additional data in terms of a col-
lection of states ωt as replacement for the measures in the commutative setting, see [17,
Section 4] for further details. Furthermore, we should be able to obtain a natural no-
tion of time evolution in the (semi-)continuum and, thus, a 1+1 dimensional theory via
Tomita-Takesaki theory whenever the states give rise to a limit state ̟ on M0 satisfying
the Kubo-Martin-Schwinger (KMS) condition.
Thus, our next step consists in providing said states which give us von Neumann alge-
bras together with a faithful state at every level t via the Gelfand-Naimark-Segal (GNS)
construction. To this end we consider a family of strictly positive probability measures
md P ProbpGq     p on the discrete, unitary dual of G indexed by the dyadic rational d P D.
Here, our leading example involves a compact Lie group G together with a family of heat-
kernel states providing the measures, which are just the Gibbs (or KMS) states associated
with the Kogut-Susskind Hamiltonian [39] of YM1`1 at level t (viewing the partition t as
a 1-dimensional lattice). The family of measures md provides a family of faithful states
ωt on Mt such that the inclusion maps ιst : Mt Ñ Ms for t ď s are state-preserving. By
standard reasoning, we have a limit state ̟ :“ lim       ÐÝt ωt on the C*-limit M0 :“ limÝÑt Mt .
Performing the GNS construction, we obtain a von Neumann algebra equipped with a
normal state pM , ̟q. Although, it is not obvious under which conditions on the family
of states ωt the state ̟ extends to a faithful state on the von Neumann algebra M , a
simple argument shows that the GNS representation of ̟ is faithful, see Section 1.4.3.
Moreover, the gauge group acts in a state-preserving way for any choice of measures md .
If each measure md equals a fixed one, we can show that the Jones’ action V ñ M0
on the C*-algebra M0 extends to a state-preserving action on the von Neumann algebra
pM , ̟q. However, besides this restricted case, there appears to be in general no simple
way to decide whether the Jones’ action V ñ M0 extends to an action on M .
Picking up the renormalization theme once more, it interesting to observe that it is pos-
sible to cast our construction into a form that is very similar to the multi-scale entan-
glement renormalization ansatz (MERA) [52, 25, 26] by mapping our inductive limit
ιst : pMt , ωt q Ñ pMs , ωs q, t ď s, to its standard form corresponding to its Bratteli diagram
[24]. In the language of [52], the system of unitaries Ut associated with this mapping
serves as disentanglers while the maps induced by the GNS construction from the stan-
dard unital embeddings of the Bratteli diagram yield the isometries, see [17, Sections 3.4
4                   ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

and 4] for further explanations.
Following this condensed outline of the main construction, let us outline the article’s main
results:
In order to further analyze the issues raised above, we specialize in this article to the case
when G is abelian and leave the general case for future research. Thereby, we are able to
give a precise description of pM , ̟q and to check when the state ̟ is faithful and when
Thompson’s group acts on M .
Firstly, we consider the case, when all measures md are equal to a single one m P ProbpGq. p
Then, we obtain a precise statement about the structure of pM , ̟q that is a crossed-
product von Neumann algebra, see Theorem 3.13. We recall here two opposite cases
where G p is torsion free and where G
                                    p is finite equipped with its Haar measure.

Theorem A. Assume that G is a separable compact abelian group and md is equal to a
fixed measure m P ProbpGq p for any d P D.
The von Neumann algebra M is semifinite. Both, the action of the gauge group and the
action of Thompson’s group V extend to state-preserving actions on pM , ̟q.
If Gp is torsion free, pM , ̟q will be isomorphic to a type I8 von Neumann algebra with
diffuse center equipped with a non-faithful state.
If Gp is finite and m “ md is the Haar measure, pM , ̟q will be the hyperfinite II1 factor
equipped with its trace.
We note that it is not possible to obtain nontrivial time evolution using Tomita-Takesaki
theory in the setup of Theorem A since we do not have a faithful non-tracial state ̟ even
though the states ωt are faithful at any finite level t. Moreover, all relevant compressions
will provide either a non-faithful state or a faithful tracial state resulting in trivial modular
time evolutions. Nevertheless, it is possible to obtain a sensible Hamiltonian H affiliated
with the algebra M when the state ̟ is constructed from the limiting case hd “ 1 that
results from the degenerate probability measure mptπuq “ δπ,πtriv , see [17, Section 3.4].
This particular limit state ̟ yields an irreducible representation of M0 and is known as
the strong-coupling vacuum in lattice gauge theory or Ashtekar-Isham-Lewandowski state
in loop quantum gravity, see [38, 3].
Secondly, we consider a more involved construction with a non-constant family of mea-
sures. For clarity of the presentation, we assume that G “ S is the circle group (phys-
ically corresponding to a pure electromagnetic field) but many of the arguments apply
to any compact, separable abelian group, see Remark 3.28. As indicated above, we
choose a physically motivated class of probability measures on the Pontyagin dual Z
such that the corresponding states are given by the Gibbs or KMS states, with possi-
bly inhomogeneous temperature distribution, of the Kogut-Susskind Hamiltonian [39]. In
the 1+1-dimensional setting, the latter is essentially given by bi-invariant Laplacian or
quadratic Casimir ∆G of G, and, thus, in the specific case at hand the measures are dis-
crete Gaussians with Fourier transform given by Jacobi theta functions. Indeed, we have
              ´1
md ptnuq “ Zβpdq  expp´n2 βpdq{2q for d P D, where β : D Ñ Rą0 is a map typically tend-
                                                   ř
ing to zero for d going to infinity, and Zβpdq “ nPZ expp´n2 βpdq{2q is the normalization
constant (or state sum). We deduce the following result, see Theorem 3.20.
Theorem B. Consider the circle group G “ S and a family of heat-kernel states md P
ProbpZq parametrized by a function β : D Ñ Rą0 . Assume that β is p-summable
                        GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                  5
     ř
(i.e. dPD βpdqp ă 8) for some 0 ă p ă 1{2.
Then, pM , ̟q is a hyperfinite type III factor equipped with a normal faithful state. More-
over, the gauge group acts in a state-preserving way on it.
This is drastically different from Theorem A where we only consider a single probability
measure m “ md . In particular, we have a nontrivial modular time evolution which
commutes with the action of the gauge group, i.e. we consider the modular flow θ :
R ñ M , θt pxq :“ ∆it x∆´it , where ∆ is the modular operator associated with the GNS
representation of pM , ̟q, see for instance [20, 12, 13, 11] for details and mathematical as
well as physical applications.
We note that, as might be guessed from the use of an abelian group and its Pontryagin
dual, the construction of the heat-kernel states can be dualized. In the particular case
of the circle group G “ S, this is achieved by defining measures as Fourier transforms
of Bessel functions of the second kind, which solve the discrete heat equation on Z.
Thereby, we obtain Op2q-vector models at each level t. We provide further details on this
duality and its relation to the strong- and weak-coupling limits of Yang-Mills theory in
[17, Sections 3.3 and 5.1].
In addition to the previous theorems, we also provide some geometrical choices of β for
which the restriction of the Jones’ action V ñ M0 to its rotation subgroup Rot of V
(i.e. all the rotations of angles 2kn ) extends to an action on the von Neumann algebra M ,
see Corollary 3.26.
Theorem C. Adopting the hypothesis of Theorem B, we consider for any dyadic rational
d P D the length of the largest s.d.i. starting at d and assume that βpdq only depends on
this length. Then, the restriction of the Jones’ action to the rotation subgroup Rot ñ M0
extends to an action on the von Neumann algebra M .
We observe that the action of the rotation subgroup Rot is not state-preserving. More-
over, we prove that under the given assumptions Thompson’s group F will fail to have
an action on the von Neumann algebra M , see Proposition 3.23.
Let us conclude the introduction with the following general observations:
This article is a first effort to use Jones’ machinery in the context of lattice gauge theory
and to provide a unification with ideas used in loop quantum gravity as well as operator-
algebraic techniques from algebraic quantum field theory [32]. The degree of generality
presented here already allows us to recover several results but there are many cases and
generalization that are open today. The ultimate goal being to replace the compact group
G by a subfactor. In future work we plan to settle the noncommutative compact group
case and, more generally, to replace the group G by a separable compact quantum group
as it is a natural framework for our construction in the noncommutative situation. A first
step in the treatment of the compact quantum group case can be found in our companion
article [17, Remark 4.3]. This will potentially allow us to deal with richer kinds of tensor
categories than representation categories of compact (abelian) groups. Moreover, we plan
to investigate higher dimensional models invoking a suitable replacement of Thompson’s
groups as well as necessary generalizations of our constructions from the point of view of
renormalization group theory, see also [17, Section 5].
A different kind of potential generalization sticking to the 1+1-dimensional setting would
involve the alteration of the states ωt to account for more complicated interactions from
6                  ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

a physical perspective. In view of the latter, our leading example, the heat-kernel state,
contains only a “kinetic” term (given by the group Laplacian ∆G ) which could be supple-
mented by a suitable “potential” term, for example, given by a multiplication operator
corresponding to a function on G. One natural choice of such a function is a character,
χπ “ TrVπ pπp . qq, w.r.t. some representation π : G Ñ UpVπ q. Up to an offset and a
normalization, this choice directly reflects the “potential” (or magnetic) term of higher
dimensional versions of the Kogut-Susskind Hamiltonian. Moreover, if we consider the
spatial circle S as embedded into two dimensions, we can interpret this choice as the re-
striction of the two-dimensional Kogut-Susskind Hamiltonian to a single plaquette. The
latter interpretation is invoked in [33] where a detailed analysis of the gauge-invariant
sector of the model including the exact solution of the spectral problem is given. Addi-
tionally, special emphasis is put on the singular nature of the classical reduced phase space
and its counterpart on the quantum side. It is interesting to point out that the Gibbs
states of this model a related to the Trotter-Kato product of the heat-kernel and the dual
heat-kernel state on the trivial tree t0 (one root and one leaf) in the weak-coupling limit,
see [17, Section 3].
Concerning gauge invariance and the generically singular reduced phase spaces of clas-
sical gauge theories, we point out the notion of Rieffel induction and its application to
constrained quantum systems [40]. As observed in [56], Rieffel induction provides an
operator-algebraic method to implement constraints in a quantum theoretical model that
avoids potential ambiguities in the definition of domains of (unbounded) observables due
to singularities in the reduced phase space. If the constraints are given in terms of an
action by a compact group, as in the models discussed here, Rieffel induction will yield
the gauge-invariant observables via restriction to an invariant subspace. But, if the con-
straints generate a non-compact group, the procedure will still apply making it a very
interesting candidate to handle the gauge-invariant sector in the case of generalized sym-
metries.
An open problem, we have not investigated so far, is to determine which type IIIλ , 0 ď
λ ď 1 factor we obtain in Theorem B. But, we expect that there is a fairly precise corre-
lation between λ and the map β. In this regard, we remark that the proof of M being a
factor is rather indirect using a continuity argument, which works when β is in ℓp pDq for
some 0 ă p ă 1{2. It appears very plausible that the correct assumption should be that
β is summable rather than p-summable.
Finally, let us briefly comment on the relation of our construction to the one proposed
by Jones in [36], a more exhaustive discussion can be found in our companion article. In
[36], the concept of a scale-invariant respectively weakly scale-invariant transfer matrix
given by collection of operators Tt is used as additional data instead of that of a (projec-
tive) family of states ωt . Both concepts can be compared if the states ωt are normal and,
thus, are given by trace-class operators Tωt : using the correspondence between the inverse
temperature in statistical mechanics and Euclidean time, a formula for the Hamiltonian
of the system can be deduced in both cases. The difference between (weak) scale invari-
ance and projective consistency is further elucidated by renormalization group theory, see
[17, Section 4]. Let us also remark that (weak) scale invariance is known as projective
consistency in the loop quantum gravity literature [49] and is exactly the property that
implies the existence of the strong-coupling Hamiltonian H referred to after theorem A.
Interestingly, weak scale invariance also appears as an essential ingredient in a recent
                        GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                   7

analysis of Hamiltonian renormalization [41].
The article is organized in the following way:
Beside the introduction this paper has three other sections. In section 1, we recall the
correspondence between standard dyadic partitions, binary forests and dyadic rationals.
We explain Jones’ machinery in our specific case giving a lattice theory and actions of
Thompson’s groups. In section 2, we explain the general construction of lattice gauge
theories in the C*-algebraic setting together with the action of Thompson’s group V . In
section 3, we introduce states and von Neumann algebras as GNS completions of C*-
algebras. After describing the general case, we specialize to abelian compact groups and
work in a dual picture. We obtain a precise structure theorem when we only deal with
one measure. We finally focus on the circle group case and a family of heat-kernel states.

                                     1. Preliminaries
1.1. The category of binary forests. A binary forest is an isotopy class of a disjoint
union of finitely many planar rooted trees embedded in the strip R ˆ r0, 1s of R2 with
roots on N ˆ t0u and leaves on N ˆ t1u. Isotopies preserve the strip but can act on the
boundary. The trees are binary meaning that each vertex has zero or two descendants.
Note that there is a natural order on the roots and the leaves of a forest. We will always
count them from left to right. Here is an example of a forest with three roots and six
leaves:
                                     f“                    .

 We confer the structure of a tensor category to these forests as follows: Let F be the
category with set of objects the natural numbers t1, 2, 3, ¨ ¨ ¨ u and morphisms F pn, mq
from n to m equal to the set of binary forests with n roots and m leaves. Consider two
forests g, f such that f has n leaves and g has n roots. Consider a representative of f
(resp. g) in the strip R ˆ r0, 1s and assume that its ith leaf (resp. the ith root) is at the
point pi, 1q (resp. pi, 0q). Shift the representative of g by one unit vertically and consider
the union of those two representatives that we contract vertically by a factor 2 to a subset
of the strip R ˆ r0, 1s. This gives us a new forest and its isotopy class is the composition
g ˝ f sometimes denoted gf . Roughly speaking, gf is the vertical concatenation of g on
top of f where the ith leaf of f is lining up with the ith root of g. Consider the forest
f of the preceding figure and the tree

                                          t“           .

The composition f ˝ t is equal to:

                                                   .



Notation 1.1. We denote by I and Y the trees with one and two leaves respectively, and
we write T for the set of all trees.
We define a tensor product structure on this category: The tensor product of objects is
the addition of natural numbers, i.e. n b m :“ n ` m, and the tensor product of forests
8                   ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

(i.e. morphisms) is the horizontal concatenation. Meaning that if f, g are forests with
representatives inside R ˆ r0, 1s, we consider the union of those two representatives when
the one of f is placed on the left and say that f b g is the isotopy class of the union of
those two representatives.
For example, if f and t are the forest and tree of above, we obtain that

                                tbf “                          .

 Equipped with this tensor product we obtained a tensor category. If n ď 1 and 1 ď j ď n,
we will write fj,n for the forest with n roots and n`1 leaves whose jth tree is Y and all the
others are equal to I, hence fj,n “ I bj´1 b Y b I n´j . It is easy to see that any morphism
is the composition of some fj,n and, thus, the tensor category F is singly generated by Y
in the sense that any morphism is the composition of tensor products of Y and the trivial
morphism I.
1.2. Dyadic rationals and partitions. Let t8 be the infinite binary rooted tree. We
decorate its vertices by intervals such that the root corresponds to the open interval p0, 1q
                                                                                 1
and the successors of a vertex decorated by pd, d1q are decorated by pd, d`d   2
                                                                                   q to the left
      d`d1   1
and p 2 , d q to the right. Note that the collection of all these decorations is given by the
intervals of the form p 2an , a`1
                               2n
                                  q with a, n natural numbers and such that a`1
                                                                             2n
                                                                                  ď 1. We call
such an interval a standard dyadic interval (s.d.i.). Here is the beginning of this labelled
tree:
                              ¨¨¨         ¨¨¨        ¨¨¨       ¨¨¨
                          p0, 1{4q p1{4, 1{2q p1{2, 3{4q p3{4, 1q


                               p0, 1{2q                p1{2, 1q


                                            p0, 1q
                                                                        .
 Let D be the set of all dyadic rationals inside the half open interval r0, 1q that is
                                 !a                               )
                            D “ n : n ě 1, 0 ď a ď 2n ´ 1 .
                                   2
We identify r0, 1q with the torus R{Z and D with the set of dyadic rationals inside of it
which explains why we remove the point 1.
A standard dyadic partition (s.d.p.) of the unit interval is a finite sequence of dyadic
rationals 0 “ d1 ă d2 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă dn ă 1 “ dn`1 such that pdj , dj`1q is a s.d.i. for any
1 ď j ď n. Note that this is strictly speaking not a partition since the union of those
intervals does not contain the boundary points dj , 1 ď j ď n ` 1. But, with the aforesaid
identification in mind, we can, for example, equally well consider half-open intervals with
left boundaries included.
Consider a finite rooted binary tree t P T with n leaves and view it as a rooted sub-tree
of t8 . We assign the decoration pej , e1j q to the jth leaf of t associated with the vertex in
t8 equal said leaf. Note that we necessarily have that ej “ e1j´1 “: dj for 2 ď j ď n ` 1
and e1 “ 0 “: d1 , e1n “ 1 “: dn`1. Therefore, we obtain a sequence of dyadic rationals
d2 ă d3 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă dn which gives a partition of p0, 1q (minus finitely many points) given by
                           GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                        9

pd1 , d2 q, pd2 , d3q, ¨ ¨ ¨ , pdn , dn`1 q with each interval being a s.d.i. and, thus, resulting in a
s.d.p. One can check that this process gives a bijection from T to the set of s.d.p. of the
unit interval. For example, if
                                              t“        ,

then the associated s.d.p. is
                                  tp0, 1{4q, p1{4, 1{2q, p1{2, 1qu.

If it is convenient, we will consider the set of trees T as a partially ordered set: s ď t iff
there exists a forest f such that t “ f s. This even makes T a direct set since any two
trees s, t are smaller than the complete tree tm for sufficiently large m, where tm is the
rooted binary tree with 2m leaves all at distance m from its root. Note that this partial
order corresponds to the binary relation between pairs of partitions where one is finer
than the other.
1.3. Thompson’s groups. Thompson’s group F is the group of piecewise linear homeo-
morphisms of the standard interval r0, 1s fixing the boundary points with integer powers of
2 as slopes and dyadic rationals for breakpoints. We recall the description of F as a frac-
tion group, see [18] for this specific example and [9, 35] – we stick to the same formalism
as the latter. Note that similar constructions of groups in the formalism of cancellative
semigroups were developed by Ore, see for instance [43]. Consider the set of all couples
pt, sq of trees with the same number of leaves that we quotient by the equivalence relation
„ generated by pf t, f sq „ pt, sq where f is any forest having the same number of roots
as the number of leaves of s (and thus of t). Denote by st the equivalence class of pt, sq.
This quotient set, denoted by GF , has a group structure with multiplication
                                   tv     pt
                                       “     where ps “ qv,
                                  su      qu
                                               ´1
neutral element e “ ss for any s P T and st “ st . We say that GF is the group of fractions
associated to the category F with fixed object 1 P obF . This group is isomorphic to
Thompson’s group F . The reason is that an element of F sends an adapted s.d.p. onto
another s.d.p. as it is affine (w.r.t. D) on each of the s.d.i. of the initial partition and will
remain unchanged if we refine both partitions in the same way. Using the correspondence
between s.d.p. and trees we obtain a description of F in terms of GF . For example, the
fraction st where
                                              t“

and
                                              s“

is the unique element of F sending r0, 1{2q onto r0, 1{4q, r1{2, 3{4q onto r1{4, 1{2q and
r1{2, 1q onto r3{4, 1q where the restriction of each of the three initial interval is linear with
positive slope.
Now, we consider the category of symmetric forests SF with objects N and morphisms
SF pn, mq “ F pn, mq ˆ Sm where Sm is the symmetric group of m elements. Graphically
we interpret a morphism pp, τ q P SF pn, mq as the concatenation of two diagrams. On the
10                    ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

bottom we have the diagram previously explained for the forest p in the strip R ˆ r0, 1s.
The diagram of τ is the union of m segments rxi , xτ piq ` p0, 1qs, i “ 1, ¨ ¨ ¨ , m, in R ˆ r1, 2s
where the xi label m distinct points in R ˆ t1u such that xi is on the left of xi`1 . The
full diagram of pp, τ q is obtained by stacking the diagram of τ on top of the diagram of
p such that xi agrees with the ith leaf of p.     Here is one example. Consider the cyclic
permutation τ of t1, 2, 3u sending 1 to 2, 2 to 3 and 3 to 1. We represent this permutation
by the diagram:
                                                           .

Let t be the tree        . We have that pt, τ q is described by the diagram:



                                                       .

 Given two symmetric forests pq, τ q P SF pn, mq, pp, σq P SF pm, lq, let li be the number of
leaves of the ith tree of p, then we define the composition of morphisms as follows:
                               pp, σq ˝ pq, τ q :“ pτ ppq ˝ q, σSpp, τ qq,
where τ ppq is the forest obtained from p by permuting its trees such that the ith tree of τ ppq
is the τ piqth tree of p and Spp, τ q is the permutation corresponding to the diagram obtained
from τ where the ith segment rxi , xτ piq ` p0, 1qs is replaced by lτ piq parallel segments. For
example, if we consider the forest

                                          f“

and the permutation
                                          τ“                   ,

then
                             pf, idq ˝ pI b I b I, τ q “ pτ pf q, Spf, τ qq
where
                                        τ pf q “

and
                          Spf, τ q “                                          .

Thompson’s group V is isomorphic to the group of fractions of the category SF . Hence,
any element of V is an equivalence class of a pair of symmetric trees. The equivalence
relation being generated by ppt, τ q, ps, σqq „ ppf, φq ˝ pt, τ q, pf, φq ˝ ps, σqqq where pf, φq
                                                       pt,τ q
is a symmetric forest. Given an element g “ ps,σq             P V and the s.d.p.’s pI1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , In q and
pJ1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , Jn q associated to s and t respectively, we have that g, viewed as a transformation
of the unit interval, is the unique piecewise linear function with constant slope on each
Ik that maps Iσ´1 piq onto Jτ ´1 piq for any 1 ď i ď n. Roughly speaking, g is a element of F
together with a permutation of the intervals.
                          GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                    11

If we consider the cyclic group Z{mZ as a subgroup of the symmetric group Sm , we
will have the subcategory AF Ă SF of affine forests for AFpn, mq “ F pn, mq ˆ Z{mZ.
The group of fractions of AF is isomorphic to Thompson’s group T . Recall that it is
the the group of piecewise affine-linear homeomorphisms of the torus R{Z with integer
powers of 2 as slopes and dyadic rationals for breakpoints. In particular, T contains the
subgroup generated by rotations about angles 2´n , n P N. We typically treat F and AF
as subcategories of SF resulting in embeddings at the level of groups F ă T ă V .
Clearly, the classical action of V on r0, 1s corresponds to an action on the set of dyadic
rationals D, which we freely make use.
1.4. Actions of Thompson’s groups. If pC, xq is a category together with a distin-
guishes object satisfying certain axioms, we can construct the group of fractions GC . If
we additionally have a functor Ψ : C Ñ D, we can construct an action of the group
of fractions GC depending on Ψ following Jones [35]. Moreover, this action will inherit
properties from the category D, e.g. if D “ Hilb is the category of Hilbert spaces with
isometries as morphisms, the action will be conveyed by a unitary representation of GC .
We present this construction in detail for the category of forests C “ F with the dis-
tinguished object 1 P N and, thus, GF is Thompson’s group F . Due to the focus of
our article, we mainly work with the target category of Hilbert spaces (equipped with
isometries) Hilb or of C*-algebras (equipped with injective *-morphisms) C*-alg.
Consider a covariant functor Φ : F Ñ D where D is a concrete category. Given a tree
t P T with n “ targetptq leaves, we define Xt :“ tpt, ξq : ξ P Φpnqu which is a copy of
Φpnq indexed by t. We set
                             XΦ :“ tpt, ξq : ξ P Φptargetptqqu{ „
where pt, ξq „ ps, ηq iff there exists forests p, q such that ppt, Φppqξq “ pqs, Φpqqηq. It follows
that XΦ is the inductive limit limÝÑtPT Xt of the directed system of objects pXt , t P Tq over
the directed set pT, ďq with connecting maps
                             ιft t : Xt Ñ Xf t , pt, ξq ÞÑ pf t, Φpf qξq.
We write ξt or simply pt, ξq by slightly abusing notation for the equivalence class of pt, ξq
inside the quotient space XΦ . If the connecting maps are injective, we will identify Xt
with a subspace of XΦ for any t P T. The set XΦ admits an action αΦ : F ñ XΦ that is
given by the formula:           ˆ ˙
                                  t u       pt
                             αΦ        :“        where qu “ ps,
                                  s ξ      Φpqqξ
for a pair of trees ps, tq with the same number of leaves, pu, ξq P XΦ and suitable forests
q, p. We call αΦ the Jones’ action (associated to Φ).
Remark 1.2. Note that this construction can be interpreted as a certain Kan extension
where the fraction group is viewed as a Quillen homotopy group, see [14, Appendix]. We
thank Sergei Ivanov for pointing out this description of the Jones’ action.

A similar construction can be performed when the functor Φ : F Ñ D is contravariant
instead of covariant. In that case, we obtain an inverse system of sets Xt and an action of
the fraction group (i.e. Thompson’s group F in this case) on the inverse limit lim
                                                                                 ÐÝtPT Xt .
We use this construction for describing the space A in Section 2.2.
12                   ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

In this article, we are only interested in tensor functors (or monoidal functors). These
have the advantage to be defined by very few data and that any Jones’ action of F will
extend to an action of V as explained below.
Consider a concrete tensor category D and let Φ : F Ñ D be a tensor functor. We have
that Φpnq “ bnk“1 Φp1q and thus Φpnq is characterized by Φp1q. If fj,n is the forest with
n roots, n ` 1 leaves and with its jth tree having two leaves, we may deduce Φpfj,n q “
idbj´1 bΦpY q b idbn´j , where id is the identity of Φp1q. Since any morphism f is a
composition of such fj,n , we find that Φ is characterized by the morphism R :“ ΦpY q P
HomD pΦp1q, Φp1qbΦp1qq. Conversely, an object A in a concrete tensor category D together
with a morphism R : A Ñ A b A defines a tensor functor from F to D. Given such a
tensor functor, we obtain a Jones’ action αΦ : F ñ XΦ .
In the context of tensor functors, we can always extend the Jones’ action of F to an
action of the largest of Thompson’s groups V as follows. Let θ : Sn Ñ AutpΦpnqq be the
action of the symmetric group defined by permutations of the tensors factors when Φpnq
is identified with bni“1 Φp1q. More precisely, if η “ η1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b ηn P bnj“1 Φp1q » Φpnq and
                                                                     pt,τ q
κ P Sn , then θpκqpηq “ ηκ´1 p1q b ¨ ¨ ¨ b ηκ´1 pnq . Consider g :“ ps,σq   P V with trees t, s having
n leaves and permutations τ, σ P Sn . If ξs is in XΦ , then we put
                                      ˆ         ˙
                                         pt, τ q s           t
                                 αΦ                   :“    ´1
                                                                   .
                                         ps, σq ξ        θpτ σqξ
This provides an action of Thompson’s group V on XΦ which extends the Jones’ action
αΨ : F ñ X Ψ .

1.4.1. The category of Hilbert spaces. Consider the category Hilb of (complex) Hilbert
spaces with isometries as morphisms and a functor Φ : F Ñ Hilb . Write H “ Φp1q and
Ht :“ tpt, ξq : ξ P Φpnqu instead of Xt . The inductive limit of (complex) vector spaces
lim
ÝÑtPT Ht has a pre-Hilbert structure given by the sesquilinear form
                             t s
                            x , y :“ xΦppqξ, Φpqqηy where pt “ qs
                             ξ η
with the inner product on the right hand side performed in the Hilbert space Φptargetppqq.
This sesquilinear form is well-defined because the morphisms of Hilb are isometries.
We complete this pre-Hilbert space to a Hilbert space that we denote by H , and we
observe that the action of Thompson’s group F extends to a unitary representation
πΦ : F Ñ UpH q.
We may add a tensor product structure to Hilb with the classical notions of tensor prod-
ucts of Hilbert spaces and of operators. Then, a Hilbert space H together with an isometry
R : H Ñ H b H defines a tensor functor ΦR : F Ñ Hilb which gives an action of V on
ÝÑtPT Ht that extends to a unitary representation πΦR : V Ñ UpH q. See [15] for explicit
lim
examples of such functors and representations.
We can also define a different tensor product structure d on Hilb by setting H d K equal
to the direct sum of the Hilbert spaces H and K and A d B equal to the direct sum of the
operators A P BpHq, B P BpKq. Using this structure, a tensor functor Φ : F Ñ pHilb, dq
is equivalent to the data consisting of a Hilbert space H together with a pair of operators
                         GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                  13

A, B P BpHq satisfying the Pythagorean equality:
                                     A˚ A ` B ˚ B “ idH .
Note that if A “ B ˚ , then this is the CAR condition. By defining tensor functors as
follows: Φpnq “ H‘n and ΦpY q “ A ‘ B, this will induce a family of representations
of Thompson’s group V called Pythagorean representations which were introduced and
studied in [16].
1.4.2. The category of C*-algebras. Consider the category of unital C*-algebras C*-alg
with injective *-morphisms. Let Ψ : F Ñ C*-alg be a functor and denote by pBt , t P Tq
the associated directed system with connecting maps ιft t : Bt Ñ Bf t and (algebraic)
inductive limit BΨ . Since ιft t is an injective *-morphism between C*-algebras it is au-
tomatically an isometry. This implies that BΨ is a *-algebra with a C*-norm } ¨ },
i.e. }a˚ a} “ }aa˚ } “ }a}2 for any a P BΨ . Therefore, the completion of BΨ w.r.t. this
norm is a C*-algebra that we denote by B0 . Since the directed system of C*-algebras
pBt , t P Tq admits a unique C*-limit, we may write limÝÑtPT Bt for the completion B0 and
call it the direct limit of C*-algebras. The general construction implies that we have
an action αΨ : F ñ BΨ by *-automorphism. But, αΨ pgq is necessarily an isometry for
g P F w.r.t. the C*-norm and thus extends into an automorphism of the C*-algebra B0 .
Therefore, the action αΨ extends in a unique way to an action α of F on the C*-algebra
B0 such that αpgq is a *-automorphism for any g P F .
We equip the category C*-alg with the minimal tensor product bmin for the object and
the associated tensor product of morphisms. A tensor functor Ψ : F Ñ pC*-alg, bminq is
defined by a C*-algebra B and an injective *-morphism R : B Ñ B bmin B. By the above
reasoning, this provides an automorphic action of Thompson’s group V on a C*-algebra
B0 .
The following example will be useful later:
Denote by bmin                                                                    min
            dPD B the unique C*-completion of the inductive limit of C*-algebras bdPE B
where E runs over the finite subsets of D.
Proposition 1.3. Consider a unital C*-algebra B and the map
                               R : B Ñ B bmin B, b ÞÑ b b 1.
Let Ψ : F Ñ pC*-alg, bminq and αΨ : V Ñ AutpB0 q be the associated tensor functor and
its Jones’ action respectively.
There exists an isomorphism of C*-algebras
                                      J : B0 Ñ bmin
                                                dPD B

such that αΨ is conjugated by J to the generalized Bernoulli shift action associated with
V ñ D, i.e.
                           AdpJqαΨ pvqpbdPD bd q “ bdPD bv´1 d ,
for any elementary tensor bdPD bd and v P V .
Proof. We prove this proposition in detail to illustrate the formalism. Consider a tree t
with n leaves and associated s.d.p. d1 “ 0 ă d2 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă dn ă dn`1 “ 1. Denote by Dptq
the set td1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , dn u and Jt : Bt Ñ bmin
                                          dPD B the unital embedding induced by the inclusion
Dptq Ă D. Let f be the forest with n roots, n ` 1 leaves and its jth tree equal to Y .
Observe that ιft t px1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b xn q “ x1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ xj b 1 b xj`1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b xn for an elementary
14                  ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

tensor x “ x1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b xn . Therefore, Jf t ˝ ιft t pxq “ Jt pxq for any such x which implies
that Jf t ˝ ιft t “ Jt by linearity and density. Since any forest is a finite composition of such
f , we infer that the family of maps pJt , t P Tq is compatible w.r.t. the directed system
                                                                                  min
pBt , t P Tq and, thus, gives rise to a densely defined map J : limÝÑtPT Bt Ñ bdPD B. As each
Jt is an injective C*-morphism and, thus, isometric, this implies that J is isometric and
extends to the C*-algebra B0 as an injective C*-morphism. Now, any dyadic rational
d P D appears in the s.d.p. of a certain tree. Therefore, any elementary tensor of the
algebraic tensor product of the B over D appears in the range of J implying that J has
dense range and, thus, is surjective because it is a morphism between C*-algebras.
Consider an element v “ st of Thompson’s group F and x “ x1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b xn P Bt Ă B0 .
Denote by d11 “ 1 ă d12 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă d1n ă d1n`1 “ 1 the s.d.p. associated to s. Then
JpαΨ pvq xt q “ Jp xs q “ bdPD x̂pdq where
                                    #
                                     xk if d “ d1k for some 1 ď k ď n
                            x̃pdq “                                       .
                                     1 otherwise

In particular, the vector xt P B0 and v “ st satisfies the formula of the proposition. By
density and directedness of T, this formula is valid for any v P F. To prove it for the largest
of Thompson’s groups V , it is sufficient to consider a permutation of a fixed s.d.p. and
an elementary tensor that can be decomposed w.r.t. this s.d.p.:
For a permutation σ P Sn , the unique element v P V sending pdj , dj`1q onto pdσpjq , dσpjq`1 q
for any 1 ď j ď n in an affine way, and an#elementary tensor x “ bnj“1xj P B bn , we have
                                             xk if d “ dσpkq for some 1 ď k ď n
that JpαΨ pvq xt q “ bdPD ypdq with ypdq “                                             . Clearly,
                                             1 otherwise
the formula of the proposition is satisfied which finishes the proof.                          

1.4.3. States and von Neumann algebras. Assuming that we have a functor Ψ : F Ñ
C*-alg, we consider the directed system pBt , t P Tq with inclusion maps ιft t : Bt Ñ Bf t
and the C*-inductive limit B0 . We intend to have a state on B0 and to consider the
von Neumann algebra induced from it. To this end, we consider a family of states
ωt : Bt Ñ C, t P T such that ιft t is state-preserving for any t and f . Then, there is
a unique state ̟ on B0 such that ̟pbq “ ωt pbq if b P Bt because of uniform boundedness
of the family ωt , where we identify Bt with a C*-subalgebra of B0 . Performing the GNS
construction for pB0 , ̟q results in a triple pπ, H, Ωq, where pπ, Hq is a *-representation
of B0 and Ω is a cyclic vector (the vacuum vector) satisfying that xπpbqΩ, Ωy “ ̟pbq for
any b P B0 . Let B be the von Neumann algebra given by the weak completion πpB0 q2 .
We continue to denote by ̟ the unique normal extension of the limit state to B via Ω.
Two important facts to keep in mind are:
First, assume that each state ωt is faithful. This implies that the GNS representation π
of B0 is faithful. Indeed, the associated GNS representation πt of Bt is faithful and thus
isometric since Bt is a C*-algebra. Since the GNS representation π of B0 restricted to Bt
contains πt we obtain that π is isometric when restricted to Bt and is thus isometric by
density on the whole algebra B0 and hence faithful, cp. [10, Proposition II.8.2.4]. How-
ever, we don’t have in general that ̟ is faithful on the von Neumann algebra B. We will
encounter such an example in Section 3.2.
                        GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                 15

Second, we always have a Jones’ action of F (and, therefore, V in case of a tensor func-
tor) on the C*-algebra B0 . However, this action might not be (asymptotically) state-
preserving and in general does not extend to the von Neumann algebra B. In analogy
with classical probability, we need a condition on the action of F resembling the quasi-
invariance of measures. This situation happens in Section 3.3 where we have that, under
certain conditions, the subgroup of dyadic rotations inside Thompson’s group T acts on
the von Neumann algebra, while Thompson’s group F does not.

                2. Gauge theory: construction of a C*-algebra
2.1. Directed systems of C*-algebras and actions of Thompson’s groups. We fix
a separable compact group G with Haar measure mG . Let BpL2 pGqq be the von Neumann
algebra of all bounded linear operators on the Hilbert space L2 pGq of complex-valued
square integrable functions on G w.r.t. the Haar measure mG . We define a C*-algebra M
associated to G which will be the basic building block of our construction of a kinematic
model.
By λ : G ñ L2 pGq, we denote the left regular unitary representation of G, and write
N :“ spanpλg : g P Gq for the C*-subalgebra of BpL2 pGqq generated by the λg that we
may writeřCG. Hence, N is the norm completion in BpL2 pGqq of the set of operators of
the form gPG ag λg where ag P C is equal to zero for all but finitely many g P G. The
unit is given by λe where e is the neutral element of G. This operator belongs to the
reduced C*-algebra of G precisely when G is discrete. We define Q :“ C pGq, i.e. Q is the
commutative C*-algebra of complex-valued continuous functions on G, which we identify
with the C*-subalgebra of BpL2 pGqq that acts by pointwise multiplication. Observe that
the von Neumann algebra generated by N and Q is equal to BpL2 pGqq. Moreover, the
unitary operator λg normalizes Q for any g P G. Let M be the C*-subalgebra of BpL2 pGqq
generated by CG and C pGq. We observe that the latter is the norm completion inside
BpL2 pGqq of the algebraic crossed product
                                   ÿ
                  C pGq ¸alg G :“ t ag λg | ag P C pGq, supppaq finite u,
                                    gPG

where supppaq denotes the the support of a that is the set of g P G for which ag ‰ 0.
Note that this crossed product is in general not the classical C*-algebraic reduced crossed
product unless G is discrete. As pointed out by Siegfried Echterhoff, we have the following
short exact sequence:
                                0 Ñ CG Ñ M Ñ C pGq Ñ 0.
In the definition of M the group G is involved twice: On the one hand, it underlies the
definition of the space of continuous functions C pGq and, on the other hand, it is the basis
of the group ring or convolution algebra CG. The first invokes the topology of G while
the second only uses the algebraic structure of G. For this reason, we use the notation Gd
in the second case to express the fact that we forget the topology of G and consider it as a
discrete group. To this end, we denote our algebra M as the crossed-product C pGq ¸ Gd .
Observe that this is only a notation and in general M is not the reduced crossed-product
of the discrete group Gd acting on the C*-algebra C pGq. Indeed, the later will not be
separable if G is uncountable as the first one M is always separable since it is a C*-
subalgebra of BpL2 pGqq where G is separable. Similar constructions and notations were
previously considered, see [29].
16                 ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

Note that in those cases in which we deal with (normal) states and von Neumann algebras
we may choose any weakly dense *-subalgebra of BpL2 pGqq, see Remark 3.5. In this sense,
our choice of C*-algebra M is minimal to include all unitaries λg , g P G and multiplication
operators a P CpGq.
From now on, all tensor products of C*-algebras are considered to be minimal tensor
products. But, as we will mainly be dealing with nuclear C*-algebras, the choice of
tensor product will mostly not matter.
We define the morphism
(2.1)      R : M Ñ M b M, Rpbq “ Adpuqpb b idq where uξpg, hq :“ ξpgh, hq,
for all ξ P L2 pG ˆ Gq. This defines a tensor functor
                     Ψ : F Ñ pC*-alg, bminq, Ψp1q :“ M, ΨpY q “ R.
By the previous section, we obtain the direct limit of C*-algebras
                                        M0 :“ lim
                                              ÝÑ Mt
                                              tPT
together with an action of Thompson’s group: αΨ : V ñ M0 .
The motivation for choosing M as the norm completion of the algebraic crossed-product
is threefold: First, M is a unital C*-algebra. Second, the map R : M Ñ M bM ř  defined in
(2.1) has a simple description when an operator a is written as a discrete sum gPG ag λg
with ag P C pGq. Third, the inductive limit algebra M0 admits a very explicit description
in terms of a discrete crossed product such as M, see Section 2.4.
Lemma 2.1. We have the following equalities:
                            ÿ           ÿ
(2.2)                    Rp ag λg q “      pag ˝ µG qλg,e ,
                                gPG          gPG

where µG is the group multiplication of G and g ÞÑ ag has finite support with values in
C pGq.
In particular, we have that RpC pGqq Ă C pGq b C pGq, RpCGq Ă CG b CG and Rpaq “
a ˝ µG , Rpbq “ b b id for any a P C pGq, b P CG.
Proof. This is a routine computation.                                                     
Remark 2.2. The identities above are still valid if a P L8 pGq is in the von Neumann
algebra of bounded measurable maps on G and b P LG is in the group von Neumann
algebra of G. Clearly, M bM embeds densely (for the weak topology) inside BpL2 pGˆGqq.
We also have the following isomorphisms at our disposal:
                      bnk“1C pGq » C pGn q and bnk“1 CG » CrGn s.
The unitary u in (2.2) is an analogue of the structure operator in [47], and it appears
naturally as multiplicative unitary in the context of quantum groups [50].
At this point, it is crucial to work with unital C*-algebras and unital maps in order to
have RpQq Ă Q b Q and RpNq Ă N b N. But, as explained in the introduction, unitality
is also natural from the point of view of the renormalization group, cp. [17, Section 4].
The preceding lemma tells us that we can define the tensor functors ΨQ , ΨN : F Ñ C*-alg
with the same R but such that ΨQ pnq is the nth tensor power of Q :“ C pGq and ΨN pnq the
nth tensor power of N :“ CG. From these two functors we obtain two directed systems
                           GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                        17

of C*-algebras pQt , t P Tq and pNt , t P Tq with limits Q0 and N0 that we identify with
C*-subalgebras of M0 . Moreover, these C*-subalgebras are stable under the action of V.
N0 and Q0 form two models that are interesting in their own right, which we refer to as
the convolution and the commutative part respectively.
Notation 2.3. If t is a tree with n leaves, we will write Gt for a copy of Gn indexed by
leaves of t. Moreover, we will write Qt “ C pGt q, Nt :“ CrGt s, and Mt :“ C pGt q ¸ Gt,d
where the label d refers fact that we think of Gt in a discrete way.
2.2. Description of the commutative part Q0 . We start by describing the limit
algebra Q0 at the group level.
To this end, we consider the contravariant tensor functor Ξ : F Ñ Set defined as Ξp1q “ G
and ΞpY q “ µG that is the group multiplication. Here, Set denotes the category of sets
equipped with the tensor product structure given by cartesian products. This functor
provides an inverse system pGt , t P Tq with maps pts : Gt Ñ Gs if s ď t (i.e. t “ f s for
some forest f ) defined by the group multiplication. The inverse limit is defined as:
                                         ź
              lim G t :“ tx “ pxt qtPT P   Gt : Ξpf qpxf t q “ xt , t P T, f P F u.
              ÐÝ
               tPT                         tPT
We have the following Jones’ action

                                          ÐÝ Gt , αΞ pvqpxq “ y,
                                 αΞ : V ñ lim
                                              tPT
where y is the unique element satisfying
                        yt pIq “ xt pv ´1 Iq if I P Iptq and v ´1 |I is affine,
and Iptq is the s.d.p. associated to the tree t P T. Another way to describe the action for
the group F is:
                                  t
                            pαΞ p qxqr “ Ξppqpxf s q where f t “ pr.
                                  s
Next, we introduce a slightly different
                                      ś description of the inverse limit which we mostly
use. Consider the product space I s.d.i. G, i.e. the product of copies of G indexed by
all s.d.i. intervals, and let A be the subset of this product equal to all x satisfying
xpIq “ xpI1 qxpI2 q for any s.d.i. I where I1 and I2 are its first and second half respectively.
Then, we have the following bijection
                                  j : A Ñ lim
                                          ÐÝ Gt , jpxqt :“ x|Iptq
                                             tPT
with inverse map
                                   j ´1 pyqpIq “ yt pIq if I P Iptq.
The Jones’ action becomes
                               αA : V ñ A , αA pvqxpIq “ xpv ´1 Iq
if v ´1 |I is affine. If v ´1 is not affine on I, then we break I into smaller s.d.i. I1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , Ik on
which v ´1 is affine and then set αA pvqxpIq :“ xpv ´1 I1 q ¨ ¨ ¨ xpv ´1 Ik q.
Recall that the space A corresponds to a space of generalized connections of a principal
G-bundle over the torus R{Z in view of classical, geometric models of gauge theory, see,
for example, [51, 49].
It is possible to introduce additional structures on the inverse system of Gt , cp. [3, 5, 4].
18                  ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

We consider Gt as a compact topological space (with its usual topology) and we equipped
it with its Borel σ-algebra and its Haar measure mGt . Since the group multiplication
µG : G ˆ G Ñ G is continuous and p.m.p., we assert that all maps Ξpf q are continuous
and p.m.p. Thus, the inverse limit limÐÝtPT Gt inherits a topology that makes it a compact
                                                                                       r
                                      ÐÝtPT Gt Ñ Gs be the projection built from all ps with
topological space. Moreover, let ps : lim
r ě s. Then, there exists, by the Riesz-Markov-Kakutani theorem, a unique probability
measure m on Ð   lim                                               ÐÝtPT Gt , mq Ñ pGs , mGs q
                   ÝtPT Gt satisfying that each projection ps : plim
is p.m.p. because each map prs , r ě s is p.m.p. By transferring the topology and the
probability
   ś         measure to A via the map j, we obtain the restriction of the product topology
of I s.d.i. G to A and a probability measure that we denote by mA . In particular, we
obtain that Thompson’s group V acts by p.m.p. homeomorphisms on A . We now describe
the limit and the Jones’ action at the C*-algebra level, cp. [4] for the gauge theory context
as well as [10] for general statements.

Proposition 2.4. We have an isomorphism of C*-algebras J : Q0 Ñ C pA q such that
JpC pGt qq “ pt ˚ pC pA qq that we continue to identify with C pGt q. Moreover, the Jones’
action α : V ñ M0 restricts to C pA q is given by the following formula:
                        v ¨ bpxq “ bpv ´1 xq, v P V, b P C pA q, x P A .
Proof. The functor ΨQ : F Ñ C*-alg is obtained by composition of the functor Ξ and the
contravariant functor C : X Ñ C pXq that sends a compact topological space X to the
C*-algebra of continuous function C pXq. This implies that the limit Q0 is isomorphic to
C pA q via the map
                                               t
                              J : Q0 Ñ C pA q, ÞÑ b ˝ pt .
                                               b
The formula for the Jones’ action on C pA q is found from the expression for the Jones’
action on A and the functor C .                                                      
Remark 2.5. It is important to note that A does not have a natural group structure
unless the group G is abelian. Clearly, this is due to the fact that the group multiplication
µG is a group morphism if and only if G is abelian and, thus, the pointwise multiplication
will only provide a group structure on A in that latter case.
                                                                                       ś
2.3. Description of the convolution part N0 . This time, we consider the group D G
of all maps from D to G with the group law given by the pointwise multiplication. We
denote by supppgqśthe support of g, i.e. the set of d P D such that gpdq ‰ e. Let ‘D G be
the subgroup of D G of finitely supported elements and Cr‘DGs its group ring. The
action V ñ D gives an action V ñ ‘D G via generalized Bernoulli shifts.
For a tree t P T with associated s.d.p. d1 “ 0 ă d2 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă dn ă dn`1 “ 1, we have a
embedding of groups ιt : Gt Ñ ‘D G given by the inclusion Dptq :“ td1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , dn u Ă D
such that Gt becomes the subgroup of maps supported in Dptq.
Proposition 2.6. There is an isomorphism J : N0 Ñ bD CG where bD CG is the infinite
minimal tensor product of the C*-algebra CG over the set D. Moreover, the Jones’ action
AdpJq ˝ α : V ñ bD CG is given by generalized Bernoulli shifts:
     AdpJq ˝ αpvqpbdPD bd q “ bdPD bv´1 d , for any elementary tensor bdPD bd and v P V.
                         GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                  19

Proof. Lemma 2.1 shows that Rpaq “ a b id for any a P N :“ CG. Therefore, Proposition
1.3 implies that we have an isomorphism J : N0 Ñ bD CG such that the conjugate of the
Jones’ action is the desired action by generalized Bernoulli shifts.                
The group ‘D G together with the action V ñ ‘D G can be interpreted as the result of
Jones’ construction for the tensor functor:
              Υ : F Ñ Gr such that Ψp1q “ G and ΥpY qpgq “ pg, eq, g P G,
where Gr is the category of groups whose tensor product structure is given by the direct
products of groups and group morphisms. This way, the classical  śtopology on ‘D G is the
final one corresponding to the restriction of the box topology of D G. By composing this
functor with the functor H ÞÑ CrHs that associates with a group its group ring *-algebra,
we obtain a functor similar to ΨN . The difference being that we do not take a completion
in this scheme.
The group ring Cr‘D Gs is a dense *-subalgebra of bD CG and we have that JpλGt pgqq “
upιt pgqq, g P Gt , t P T where u : ‘D G Ñ bD CG is the canonical embedding. We have the
following identity for the action of V on the group ring that is another way to define the
Jones’ action on N0 :
                          rAdpJqαpvqspug q “ uvg , g P ‘D G, v P V.

2.4. Description of the full inductive limit M0 . Following the description of Q0 and
N0 , we consider M0 and the Â
                            interplay between these two subalgebras. We freely identify
Q0 with C pA q and N0 with min dPD CG. As before, we denote by u : ‘D G Ñ N0 , g ÞÑ ug
the embedding of the group ‘D G inside the unitary group of N0 . We observe that the
group ‘D G admits an action on A by:
(2.3)           g ¨ xpd, d1q “ gpdqxpd, d1q, pd, d1 q a s.d.i., g P ‘D G, x P A .
This action does not restricts to an action of ‘D G on the spaces pGt , mGt q, t P T. Nev-
ertheless, for any g P ‘D G, we find tg P T s.t. the map g¨ : pGs , ms q Ñ pGs , ms q is
well-defined for s ě tg as well as continuous and p.m.p. This way, we have a family of
continuous actions on A by the subgroups ‘Dptq G, where Dptq “ td1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , dn u is the set of
boundary points associated to the s.d.p. of the tree t, compatible with the inverse system
of the pGt , mGt q given by the contravariant functor Ξ defined in Section 2.2. This implies
that the group ‘D G acts by p.m.p. homeomorphism on pA , mA q.
Here, we are only interested in knowing that each element g P ‘D G acts continuously and
p.m.p. on A . We do not require any statement regarding the continuity of the morphism
‘D G Ñ AutpA q. Therefore, we have so far not defined any topology on AutpA q. We
denote by C pA q ¸alg ‘D G the *-algebra equal to the algebraic crossed-product for this
action generated by the group ring Cr‘D Gs and C pA q.
Theorem 2.7. The *-algebra C pA q ¸alg ‘D G embeds as a dense *-subalgebra of M0 .
There exists a unique faithful *-representation
                                  π : M0 Ñ BpL2 pA , mA qq
satisfying
         πpbug qξpxq “ bpxqξpg ´1 xq, b P C pA q, g P ‘D G, ξ P L2 pA , mA q, x P A .
20                   ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

The Jones’ action α : V ñ M0 implemented by the functor Ψ satisfies the formula:
                     αpvqpbug q “ bpv ´1 ¨quvg , v P V, b P C pA q, g P ‘D G
and is implemented by the unitaries Uv P UpL2 pA , mA qq, v P V defined by the formula:
                         Uv ξpxq :“ ξpv ´1xq, ξ P L2 pA , mA q, x P A .
Proof. Consider a tree t with associated s.d.p. d1 “ 0 ă d2 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă dn ă dn`1 “ 1, let
Dptq “ td1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , dn u be the set of endpoints and let Iptq be the set of s.d.i. pdj , dj`1q, 1 ď
j ď n. Recall that Mt “ C pGt q ¸ Gt,d and identify the first and second copy of Gt with
‘Iptq G and ‘Dptq G respectively, thus Mt » C p‘Iptq Gq ¸alg ‘Dptq G. Observe that ‘Dptq G
acts on ‘Iptq G via the formula (2.3). In this way, we can identify the dense *-subalgebra
C p‘Iptq Gq ¸alg ‘Dptq G as a *-subalgebra of C pA q ¸alg ‘D G. By the preceding results,
this collection of embeddings inside C pA q ¸alg ‘D G respects both directed systems which
implies that C pA q ¸alg ‘D G embeds inside M0 . Moreover, C pA q ¸alg ‘D G contains the
union of the C p‘Iptq Gq ¸alg ‘Dptq G for t P T which is a dense subalgebra of M0 and, thus,
C pA q ¸alg ‘D G is dense inside M0 .
Next, we show that we have a directed system of faithful representations. Consider
πt : Mt Ñ BpL2 pGt qq the obvious representation coming from the definition of Mt ,
which is faithful by definition. Observe that we have a directed system of Hilbert spaces
pL2 pGt , mGt q, t P Tq with inclusion maps wtf t : L2 pGt , mGt q Ñ L2 pGf t , mGf t q given by
wtf t pξqpxq :“ ξppft t pxqq, ξ P L2 pGt , mGt q, x P Gf t . Moreover, the maps wtf t are isometries
since the projections pft t : pGf t , mGf t q Ñ pGt , mGt q are p.m.p. The limit of this sys-
tem is L2 pA , mA q. Recall that ιft t : Mt Ñ Mf t is the embedding given by the functor
Ψ : F Ñ C*-alg . We have the following compatibility condition:
                              wtf t pπt pat qξt q “ πf t pιft t pat qqwtf t pξt q,
for any at P Mt and vector ξt P L2 pGt q. Therefore, we can define a *-representation
on the direct limit: π : lim
                           ÝÑ tPT
                                  Mt Ñ BpL2 pA , mA qq satisfying πt pat qξt “ πpat qξt for
any at P Mt and ξt P L2 pGt q. Since each πt is injective, it is an isometry and, thus, π
extends to a faithful representation on the C*-algebra completion M0 . For any t P T,
b P C p‘Iptq Gq, g P ‘Dptq G and ξ P L2 pGt q, we have that πpbug qξ “ bξpg ´1¨q and by
density the formula of the theorem.
The properties of the Jones’ action are a consequence of the last two subsections. The
unitary implementation is checked by a routine computation.                              
The construction of L2 pA , mA q and the representation v P V ÞÑ Uv P UpL2 pA , mA q
can be interpreted as a Jones’ representation. Indeed, consider the contravariant tensor
functor Ξ̃ : F Ñ Prob, where Prob is the category of probability measure spaces with
direct product for tensor product satisfying Ξ̃p1q “ pG, mG q and Ξ̃pY q being the group
multiplication. Compose it with the contravariant tensor functor L2 : Prob Ñ Hilb that
sends a probability measure space pX, νq to L2 pX, νq. Then, v P V ÞÑ Uv is the Jones’
action induced by the covariant tensor functor L2 ˝ Ξ̃ : F Ñ Hilb .
Remark 2.8. The representation π of M0 is typically called irregular because the time-
zero gauge fields are only defined in exponentiated form via C pA q. This irregularity is
a consequence of the fact that we work with a Hilbert space representation of an algebra
                          GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                21

of gauge fields. If we wanted to work with regular representation, we would presumably
need to invoke indefinite inner product spaces, see [42].
                                              ś
2.5. Action of the gauge group. Let Γ :“ D G be the infinite product of G over the
set D equipped with the Tychonoff topology, i.e. the group of all maps g : D Ñ G with
the pointwise convergence topology. It is a separable compact group.
We consider a tree t with n leaves and its associated s.d.p. d1 “ 0 ă d2 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă dn ă
dn`1 “ 1. We identify the group Gt with ‘Iptq G where Iptq “ tpdi , di`1q, 1 ď i ď nu and
define the gauge action at level t:
                 Zt : Γ ñ Gt , Zt psqpgqpdi , di`1q “ spdi qgpdi , di`1 qspdi`1 q´1 .
As we work with the torus R{Z, we have the periodicity condition spdn`1 q “ sp1q “
sp0q “ spd1 q. This action is p.m.p. w.r.t. the Haar measure mGt because Gt is unimodular
and, thus, provides a unitary representation
         Wt : Γ Ñ UpL2 pGt qq, Wt psqξpxq :“ ξpZt ps´1 qxq, s P Γ, x P Gt , ξ P L2 pGt q.
We denote by γt : Γ ñ BpL2 pGt qq the adjoint action γt psqpaq :“ Wt psqaWt psq˚ , s P Γ, a P
BpL2 pGt qq.
The following proposition follows from a routine computation but requires several identi-
fications. We provide the proof for the convenience of the reader.
Proposition 2.9. The C*-subalgebra Mt “ C pGt q ¸ Gt,d Ă BpL2 pGt qq is stable under the
action γt : Γ ñ BpL2 pGt qq and satisfies the formula:
                                     ˜         ¸
                                       ÿ            ÿ
                γt : Γ ñ Mt , γt psq      ag λg ÞÑ     ag pZt psq´1 ¨qλsgs´1 ,
                                         gPGt            gPGt

for s P Γ, ag P C pGt q and g ÞÑ ag with finite support.
Proof. Consider a tree t associated with s.d.p. data d1 “ 0 ă d2 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă dn ă dn`1 “
1, Dptq, Iptq as above. Identify Mt with the norm completion of C p‘Iptq Gq¸alg ‘Dptq G and
L2 pGt q with L2 p‘Iptq Gq. Observe that under those identifications the left regular action
of Gt on itself becomes
              ‘Dptq G ñ ‘Iptq G, pg ¨ xqpd, d1 q :“ gpdqxpd, d1q for pd, d1q P Iptq.
Consider s P Γ, a P C p‘Iptq Gq, g P ‘Dptq G and ξ P L2 pGt q. Observe that
              γt psqaξpxq “ Wt psqaWt psq˚ ξpxq “ aWt psq˚ ξpZt ps´1 qxq
                          “ apZt ps´1 qxqWt psq˚ ξpZtps´1 qxq “ apZt ps´1 qxqξpxq
Therefore, γt psqpaq “ apZt ps´1 q¨q.
Consider pd, d1q P Iptq. We have that
              Zt psqg ´1Zt ps´1 qxpd, d1 q “ spdqpg ´1Zt ps´1 qxqpd, d1 qspd1 q´1
                                          “ spdqgpdq´1pZt ps´1 qxqpd, d1 qspd1q´1
                                          “ spdqgpdq´1spdq´1 xpd, d1 qspd1 qspd1 q´1
                                          “ psgs´1q´1 pdqxpd, d1 q.
22                     ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

Now, we infer the result for the convolution operator λg :
               γt psqpλg qξpxq “ λg Wt psq˚ ξpZtps´1 qxq “ Wt psq˚ ξpg ´1Zt ps´1 qxq
                                 “ ξpZtpsqg ´1 Zt ps´1 qxq “ ξppsgs´1q´1 xq
                                 “ λsgs´1 ξpxq.
We obtain that γt psqpλg q “ λsgs´1 .                                                         
Consider the C*-algebraic limit M0 :“ lim ÝÑtPT Mt that is isomorphic to the norm com-
                                       2
pletion of C pA q ¸alg ‘D G inside BpL pA , mA qq by Theorem 2.7. The family of actions
Zt : Γ ñ pGt , mGt q is compatible with the inverse system of probability measures spaces
pGt , mGt , t P Tq obtained from the contravariant functor Ξ : F Ñ Set introduced in
Section 2.2. Moreover, all maps involved are p.m.p. and continuous. This implies that
there exists a unique action Z : Γ ñ pA , mA q such that if we project A onto Gt , we
will obtain the action Zt . Moreover, if we equip A with its topology inherited from the
inverse system of topological space, Γ will act by p.m.p. homeomorphisms. The action Z
is defined by the formula:
                                Zpsqpxqpd, d1 q :“ spdqxpd, d1qspd1 q´1 ,
               ś
for s P Γ :“       D G, x P A   and pd, d1q is a s.d.i. The corresponding unitary representation
is given by
                       W : Γ Ñ UpL2 pA , mA qq, W psqξpxq :“ ξpZpsq´1xq,
s P Γ, x P A , ξ P L2 pA , mA q, and the associated adjoint action by
                        γ : Γ ñ BpL2 pA , mA qq, γpsqpaq :“ W psqaW psq˚ ,
s P Γ, a P BpL2 pA , mA qq.
The following proposition results from a routine computation and the formula for the
Jones’ action of Theorem 2.7.
Proposition 2.10. The C*-subalgebra M0 Ă BpL2 pA , mA qq is stable under the action
γ : Γ ñ BpL2 pA , mA qq. We continue to denote by γ the restricted action that we call the
gauge group action and which satisfies the formula:
                                ˜            ¸
                                   ÿ                ÿ
              γ : Γ ñ M0 , γpsq         ag ug ÞÑ       ag pZpsq´1 ¨qusgs´1 ,
                                        gP‘D G             gP‘D G

for s P Γ, ag P C pA q and g ÞÑ ag with finite support.
Let α : V ñ M0 be the Jones’ action. Then, we have the compatibility condition:
                       αpvqγpsqαpv ´1q “ γpspv ´1 ¨qq, for any s P Γ, v P V.
Now, we show that the gauge group action is basically the left regular action of the group
Γ. To see this, we introduce the holonomy map H, see below, that is defined w.r.t. the
specific point 1 on the torus in the sense of a boundary condition.
Let us consider x P A and d P D. There exists a tree t with s.d.p. d1 “ 0 ă d2 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă
dn ă dn`1 “ 1 such that d “ dj for a certain 1 ď j ď n, and we put
                         Hpxqpdq :“ xpd, dj`1qxpdj`1, dj`2q ¨ ¨ ¨ xpdn , 1q.
                           GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                         23

This formula does not depend on the choice of the tree t and defines a map
                                             ź
                                  H :A Ñ        G.
                                                          D
                                                                           ś
Proposition 2.11. The map H is an homeomorphism from A onto D G called the
holonomy map. Its inverse is defined by the formula:
                         #
                           gpdqgpd1q´1 if d1 ‰ 1              ź
         ´1          1
      H pgqpd, d q “                               , for g P    G and pd, d1 q a s.d.i.
                           gpdq otherwise                     D
                                       ś
Moreover, it is p.m.p. when A and D G are equipped with mA and the tensor product
of measures bD mG respectively.                               ś
We transfer the gauge group action
                                 ś     Z  : Γ ñ  pA , mA q to  D G via ś
                                                                       the conjugation with
the map H giving us Z 1 : Γ ñ p D G, bD mG q. Identifying the space D G with the gauge
group Γ, we have that
                                                                ź
               Z 1 psqgpdq “ spdqgpdqsp0q´1, for any s P Γ, g P    G, d P D.
                                                                           D
In particular, the associated unitary representation is strongly continuous.
This last proposition is easy to check and is left to the reader.
2.6. Local algebras of fields. Consider a connected open subset O of the torus. We
intend to define the algebra of (time-zero) fields in this region of space. Let t P T be a
tree and let Iptq be the associated collection of open s.d.i. Recall that
                    Mt » bIPIptq M » bIPIptq pC pGq ¸ Gd q » C pGt q ¸ Gt,d .
We write Ipt, Oq for the subset of s.d.i. I P Iptq with I Ă O and define the C*-subalgebra
Mt pOq “ bIPIpt,Oq M b bJRIpt,Oq C. Moreover, we define the coordinate projection
                            pt,O : Gt Ñ Gt,O , pgI qIPIptq ÞÑ pgI qIPIpt,Oq
and the group embedding
                                                                          #
                                                                              gI if I P Ipt, Oq
       ιt,O : Gt,O Ñ Gt , pgI qIPIpt,Oq ÞÑ pg̃I qIPIptq such that g̃I “                           .
                                                                              e otherwise
The inclusion Mt pOq Ă Mt corresponds to the embedding
                            jt,O : C pGt,O q ¸ Gt,O,d Ñ C pGt q ¸ Gt,d ,
                                   ÿ             ÿ
                                       ag λg ÞÑ       pag ˝ pt,O qλιt,O pgq ,
                                 gPGt,O          gPGt,O

with ag P C pGt,O q and g ÞÑ ag finitely supported. Recall that A is the compact space of
maps x from the set of s.d.i. to G satisfying xpIq “ xpI1 qxpI2 q whenever I1 , I2 are the first
and second half of the s.d.i I equipped with the product subspace topology. Therefore,
we define the space                                ź
                                 A pOq :“ A X              G
                                                      Is.d.i. :IĂO
and its associated coordinate projection pO : A Ñ A pOq. This space can be interpreted
as inverse limit of the following system: consider the collection of spaces pGt,O , t P Tq
and the projections pft t pOq : Gf t,O Ñ Gt,O , x ÞÑ pt,O ˝ pft t ˝ ιf t,O pxq, where pft t : Gf t Ñ Gt
24                  ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

is the projection constructed via the group multiplication, see Section 2.2.
We denote by DpOq the set of d P D such that d P O or d is the left boundary point of
the connected open set O. We define the inclusion
                                                   #
                                                    gpdq if d P DpOq
                  ιO : ‘DpOq G Ñ ‘D G, ιO pgqpdq “                      .
                                                    e otherwise
                                     ś
We know that the gauge group Γ :“ D G acts on ś    M0 via the action γ defined in Section
2.5. We define the localized gauge group ΓpOq :“ DXO G, where the product runs over
all dyadic rationals that are in the closure of O. We denote by qO : Γ Ñ ΓpOq the
associated coordinate projection, and we define the action
                ZO : ΓpOq ñ A pOq, ZO psqpxqpd, d1 q :“ spdqxpd, d1qspd1 q´1 ,
for s P ΓpOq, x P A pOq, pd, d1q a s.d.i. contained inside O. Here, we consider the intersec-
tion of D with the closure of O for the definition of ΓpOq to include both boundary points
of O. This is necessary because the formula for ZO above requires to use the values spdq
and spd1 q´1 also when d and d1 are the left and right boundary of O respectively.

We deduce the following properties.
Proposition 2.12. Consider some connected open subsets O, O1, O2 of the torus and a
tree t P T.
    (1) If O1 Ă O2 , then Mt pO1 q Ă Mt pO2q.
    (2) If O1 X O2 “ H, then Mt pO1 q and Mt pO2 q mutually commute.
    (3) If t ď s, then Mt pOq is a unital C*-subalgebra of Ms pOq when Mt is identified with
        a subalgebra of Ms via the functor Ψ.
    (4) The norm closure of the union of the C*-algebras pMs pOq, s P Tq is a unital
        C*-subalgebra M0 pOq Ă M0 . The algebraic crossed-product C pA pOqq ¸alg ‘DpOq G
        embeds inside M0 pOq and is a dense *-subalgebra.
    (5) The inclusion M0 pOq Ă M0 restricts to the following embedding
                      jO : C pA pOqq ¸alg ‘DpOq G Ñ C pA q ¸alg ‘D G
                            ÿ              ÿ
                                 ag ug ÞÑ      pag ˝ pO quιO pgq ,
                         gP‘DpOq G        gP‘D G

         where g ÞÑ ag P C pA pOqq is finitely supported.
     (6) If O1 Ă O2 , then M0 pO1q Ă M0 pO2 q.
     (7) If O1 X O2 “ H, then M0 pO1 q and M0 pO2 q mutually commute.
     (8) If v is an element of Thompson’s group T , then αpvqpM0pOqq “ M0 pvOq where α
         is the Jones’ action.
     (9) Let γO : ΓpOq ñ M0 pOq be the action satisfying
                           ¨             ˛
                               ÿ                 ÿ
                    γO psq ˝       ag ug ‚ :“          ag pZO ps´1 q¨qusgs´1 .
                           gP‘DpOq G          gP‘DpOq G

        This corresponds to the restriction of the gauge group action on MO that we call
        the localized gauge group action. Moreover, the family of localized gauge group
        actions is equivariant w.r.t. the Jones’ action, i.e. Adpαpvqq ˝ γO “ γvO for v P T .
                         GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                  25

Proof. (1) and (2) are obvious from the definition of Mt pOq in term of tensor products
over the set Iptq.
(3) comes from the fact that the directed system pMt , , ιst , t ď s P Tq has unital *-morphism
embeddings for maps.
The first part of (4) is obvious since by (3) we have that pMt pOq, t P Tq is nested and
Mt pOq Ă Mt by definition.
The second parts of (4) and (5) come from the identification of Mt » C pGt q ¸dis Gt and
its embedding inside M0 that is identified with the completion of C pA q ¸alg ‘D G.
(6) and (7) are easy consequences of (5).
(8) and (9) are obvious consequences of the formulae given in Theorem 2.7 and Proposition
2.10. Note that we restrict to Thompson’s group T in order to have that vO is still
connected.                                                                                    
Remark 2.13. In subsequent sections, we introduce a state ̟ on M0 and perform the
GNS construction giving a von Neumann algebra equipped with a cyclic vector pM , Ω̟ q.
Then, we can define the localized von Neumann algebra M pOq as the weak completion of
M0 pOq inside M resulting in local, isotonous net of von Neumann algebras. If the action
of Thompson’s group T extends to M , we obtain a statement similar to the previous
proposition, where the space O is send to vO for v P T . Moreover, we have a similar
statement for the action of the localized gauge groups. At this point, we will not develop
further the von Neumann algebra version of the net of field algebras because statements
easily follow from the C*-algebraic case.

 3. Gauge theory: construction of a von Neumann algebra with a state
3.1. General construction. We now want to find a suitable state on M0 and consider
its associated von Neumann algebra obtained via the GNS construction. We start by
considering a state on the C*-algebra M :“ C pGq ¸dis G.
3.1.1. Construction of a state on M. Let G     p be the unitary dual of G that is the set
of equivalence classes of irreducible unitary representations of G. Recall that since G
is compact and separable, this set is countable and all the representations are finite
dimensional. We call them pπ, Hπ q with dπ being the dimension of Hπ . We write χπ pgq :“
trHπ pπpgqq, g P G for the character associated to π where trHπ is the non-normalized trace.
Remark 3.1. As stated in the introduction, the choice of the state is driven by the heat
kernel of a compact Lie group G. The bi-invariant Laplacian ∆G of G determines the
strong-coupling limit of the Kogut-Susskind Hamiltonian of lattice gauge theory. In fact,
it corresponds to the full Hamiltonian in the 1+1-dimensional setting. Now, the heat
kernel is the fundamental solution ρβ (at the identity of G) to the heat equation,
                                        d
                                          ρ “ 12 ∆G ρβ ,
                                       dβ β

and determines a family of associated Gibbs or KMS states on M via the trace-class
operators λpρβ q. As is well-known, ρβ has an expansion into characters of G,
                                        ÿ         β
                                   ρβ “     dπ e´ 2 cπ χπ ,
                                            p
                                          πPG

where cπ is the negative of the eigenvalue of ∆G w.r.t. pπ, Hπ q. Thus, ρβ determines a
probability measure on Gp via h0,β pπq “ ρβ peq´1 d2π e´ β2 cπ .
26                  ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

Following the preceding remark, we choose a strictly positive probability measure m P
ProbpGqp on G p and set h0 : G p Ñ r0, 1s such that h0 pπq :“ mptπuq. Note that such a m
exists if and only if G is separable. Set
                                          ÿ
                                    h :“     d´1
                                              π h0 pπqχπ
                                                p
                                              πPG

that is continuous and integrable on pG, mG q. Consider the functional
                               ωpbq :“ Trpbλphqq, b P BpL2 pGqq.
It is important to observe that each character χ defines a central projection λpχq of the
group von Neumann algebra LG such that the family tλpχquχ is a partition of the identity.
In particular, we have that λphq is in the center of LG.
Notation: We have defined a probability measure m on the dual group G  p using a function
h. Recall that mG is the Haar measure on G with total mass one which should not be
confused with m. We write Lp pGq for the space Lp pG, mG q w.r.t. the Haar measure mG .
Lemma 3.2. The functional ω is a faithful normal state on BpL2 pGqq and satisfies
                      ˜         ¸
                        ÿ            ÿ ˆż            ˙
                    ω      bg λg “           bg dmG hpg ´1 q,
                               gPG            gPG       G

where bg P L8 pGq and is equal to zero for all but finitely many g P G.

Proof. Consider the function πn,m pgq :“ xπpgqδm  π                          p and pδ π , 1 ď k ď
                                                    , δnπ y, g P G where π P G    ? k
dπ q is an orthonormal basis of Hπ . Peter-Weyl theorem states that the set t dπ πn,m , π P
 p 1 ď n, m ď dπ u is an orthonormal basis of L2 pGq and observe that
G,
                                      #
                                1       πn,n if π “ π 1 and n “ m
                         χπ ˚ πn,m  “                                   .
                                        0 otherwise

Consider some scalars ařπ , π P G  p satisfying that ř p |aπ |dπ ă 8. This implies that
                                                            πPG
the ř series of functions πPGp aπ χπ converges uniformly on G to a continuous function
a “ πPGp aπ χπ that we identify with a convolution operator of LG. The formula of above
                                                                              ř
implies that Trpλpχπ qq “ dπ for any π P G  p and thus Trpλpaqq “ apeq “          p aπ dπ . More-
                                                                                πPG
over, if b “ πn,m and is identified with the associated operator of pointwise multiplication
b P L8 pGq, then Trpbλpaqq “ 0 unless π is the trivial representation for any a as above.
This implies that for any b P L8 pGq we have that
                                                    ˆż             ˙
                     Trpbλpaqq “ xb, 1y Trpλpaqq “          b dmG Trpλpaqq.
                                                            G
                        ř        ´1
                                                    ř
Observe that hpeq “                       “ πPGp h0 pπq “ 1. Moreover, λg λphq “ λphg q
                              p dπ h0 pπqdπ
                            πPG
where hg pxq “ hpg ´1 xq and thus Trpλg λphqq “ hg peq “ hpg ´1 q. This implies the formula
of the lemma.
The set of characters forms a set of orthogonal projections inside LG with sum equal to
the identity. This implies that λphq is a positive operator with strictly positive spectrum
                              p implying that ω :“ Trp¨λphqq is faithful.
(since h0 pπq ‰ 0 for any π P G)                                                          
We now define our setting and our family of states.
                          GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                      27

3.1.2. A coherent family of states. We consider a family of measures given by any map
m : D Ñ ProbpGq,    p d ÞÑ md such that md is strictly positive for any d P D. Define
       ř      h pπq
hd :“ πPGp d,0  dπ
                    χπ for d P D where hd,0 is the unique positive map satisfying md pAq “
ř
                             p
  πPA hd,0 pπq for any A Ă G. The element hd belongs to the center of LG and defines a
normal faithful state
                                   ωd : b P BpL2 pGqq ÞÑ Trpbhd q

that we restrict to M.
Consider a tree t P T with n leaves and associated s.d.p. d1 “ 0 ă d2 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă dn ă dn`1 “
1. We have Mt “ C pGt q ¸dis Gt living inside BpL2 pGt qq. We identify BpL2 pGt qq with the
von Neumann nth tensor power of BpL2 pGqq denoted BpL2 pGqqbn . Define
      ‚ the element ht :“ hd1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b hdn that is in the center of LGt ;
      ‚ the associated probability measure mt :“ md1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b mdn on Gt and
      ‚ the state ωt : Mt Ñ C, ωt pbq “ Trpbht q.

Proposition 3.3. Fix a tree t with associated s.d.p. d1 “ 0 ă d2 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă dn ă dn`1 “ 1
and identify Mt with the nth tensor power of M. The state ωt of Mt is equal to the tensor
product of states ωd1 b¨ ¨ ¨bωdn that is the restriction of a normal faithful state. It satisfies
the equality
                         ˜         ¸
                            ÿ             ÿ ˆż             ˙ź n
(3.1)                 ωt      ag λg “               ag dmt      hdj pgj´1q,
                           gPGt                gPGt         Gt          j“1


where g ÞÑ ag P C pGt q has finite support. Moreover, the embedding Ψpf q : Mt Ñ Mf t is
state-preserving (i.e. ωf t ˝ Ψpf q “ ωt ) for any forest f with n roots.

Proof. By identifying ht with hd1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ hdn we obtain that Trp¨ht q “ bnj“1 Trp¨hdj q and thus
ωt is identified with ωd1 b ωd2 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b ωdn . Since any ωd , d P D is a normal faithful state
so does ωt .
Consider an elementary tensor of functions a “ a1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ an P C pGt q and g “ pg1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , gn q P
Gt . By applying ωt to a and λg we obtain:

                                  ź
                                  n                   n ż
                                                      ź                      ż
                      ωt paq “          ωdj paj q “              aj dmdj “            a dmt
                                  j“1                 j“1    G                   Gt


and
                                 ź
                                 n                    ź
                                                      n                      ź
                                                                             n
                    ωt pλg q “         ωdj pλgj q “         Trpλgj hdj q “         hdj pgj´1 q.
                                 j“1                  j“1                    j“1

Observe that since ht is in the center of LGt (and is trace class with trace equal to one)
we have that Trpaλg ht q “ Trpaht q Trpλg ht q. This proves formula (3.1)
Consider f :“ fj,n the forest with n roots, n ` 1 leaves whose jth tree has two leaves
                  d `d
and write ej :“ j 2 j`1 . Since any forest is a composition of such elementary one it is
sufficient to show ωf t ˝ Ψpf q “ ωt . Moreover, by density it is sufficient to check the
28                     ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

equality ωf t ˝ Ψpf qpxq “ ωt pxq for an elementary tensor x “ x1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b xn . Observe that
     ωf t ˝ Ψpf qpxq “ ωf t px1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b xj´1 b Rpxj q b xj`1 ¨ ¨ ¨ b xn q
                     “ ωd1 px1 q ¨ ¨ ¨ ωdj´1 pxj´1 qrωdj b ωej spRpxj qq b ωdj`1 pxj`1 q ¨ ¨ ¨ ωdn pxn q
                                                        ź
                     “ rωdj b ωej spupxj b idqu˚ q         ωdi pxi q
                                                           i‰j
                                                             ź
                                              ˚
                     “ Trpupxj b idqu phdj b hej qq                ωdi pxi q
                                                             i‰j



Observe that the operator u belongs to the group von Neumann algebra RpG ˆ Gq acting
to the right which commutes with LpG ˆ Gq. Since hd is in LG for any d P D we obtain
that u commutes with hdj b hej and thus
               Trpupxj b idqu˚ phdj b hej qq “ Trppxj b idqphdj b hej qq “ ωdj pxj q
implying that ωf t ˝ Ψpf q “ ωt .                                                                          

3.1.3. The limit state and the GNS completion. By the last proposition we can define
̟ to be the unique state on M0 satisfying that ̟pbq “ ωt pbq for any b P Mt and any
t P T. Let M be the GNS completion of M w.r.t. ̟ and continue to write ̟ the normal
extension of this state on M , see Section 1.4 for more details.
Recall that the group ring Cr‘D Gs embeds as a dense *-subalgebra inside N0 and that
we have an action ‘D G ñ A given by the formula gxpIq :“ gpdqxpIq where I is a
s.d.i. starting at d. Let C pA q ¸alg ‘D G be the *-algebra
                          ÿ
                       t      bg ug : bg P C pA q, | supppg ÞÑ bg q| ă 8u
                           gP‘D G

such that Adpug qbpxq “ bpg ´1 xq for any g P ‘D G, b P C pA q, x P A . The next theorem
gives a description of M as a GNS-completion of a crossed-product but when the state
is nontrivial on the group acting part.
Theorem 3.4. There is an injective *-morphism
                                        J : C pA q ¸alg ‘D G Ñ M
with weakly dense image such that
                                                     ¨                                         ˛
                        ÿ                    ÿ        ż                        ź
(3.2)         ̟ ˝ Jp            bg ug q “            ˝ bg ptqdmA ptq                 hd pgpdq´1q‚.
                       gP‘D G               gP‘D G     A                 dPsupppgq
                                            ś
The gauge group action γ : Γ :“ D G ñ M0 is state-preserving and thus extends to an
action on the completion M .
If all measures md are equal to a single one, the Jones’ action αΨ : V ñ M0 will be
state-preserving and extends to an action on M .
Proof. Theorem 2.7 implies that the range of J is weakly dense. Since the GNS repre-
sentation associated to ̟ is faithful (see Section 1.4.3), then the map J is necessarily
injective. The formula of the state is obvious at any tree level t P T giving us the formula
for the algebraic crossed-product C pA q ¸alg ‘D G.
                         GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                  29
                                                                     ř
Consider s P Γ and an element of the algebraic crossed-product gP‘D G bg ug . Note that
     ´ř           ¯ ř
                                      ´1
γpsq   gP‘D G g g “
              b u       gP‘D G bg pZps q¨qusgs´1 that is send by the state to
                   ¨                                                      ˛
               ÿ    ż                         ź
                   ˝ bg pZps´1 qtqdmA ptq           hd pspdqgpdq´1spdq´1 q‚.
              gP‘D G    A                      dPsupppgq

The measure mA is invariant under the transformation Zpsq by Proposition 2.11. More-
over, the function hd is in the span of the character of G implying that
                            hd pspdqgpdq´1spdq´1q “ hd pgpdq´1q.
We obtain that γpsq preserves the state on a weakly dense subalgebra and thus is a
state-preserving automorphism of pM , ̟q.
Recall that V ñ pA , mA q is p.m.p. which implies, using (3.2), that ̟ restricted to C pA q
is invariant under the action α : V ñ C pA q. The *-algebra generated by ‘D G is closed
under the action of V and the state ̟ restricted on it splits as an infinite tensor product
of states indexed by D. If md does not depend on d P D, then ̟|Cr‘D Gs is equal to an
infinite tensor product of the same state. Since the Jones’ action acts by shifting indices
in D, it will unchange the restricted state ̟|Cr‘D Gs . Finally observe that ̟ satisfies that
̟pbcq “ ̟pbq̟pcq if b P C pA q and c P Cr‘D Gs and that any element of C pA q ¸alg ‘D G
can be written as a sum of bc with b P C pA q and c P Cr‘D Gs. This implies that the
action α : V ñ C pA q¸alg ‘D G is state-preserving when md does not depend on d P D. In
that case, the Jones’ action defines an action by automorphism of V on the von Neumann
algebra M .                                                                                
Note that in general the action α : V ñ M0 does not extend to an action on M . The
problem being that the state ̟ is not always invariant under this action. In Section 3.3
we will present a model where the rotation subgroup of Thompson’s group T still acts on
M but in a non-state preserving way.
Remark 3.5. The pair pM , ̟q does not depend on the choice, M, of a weakly dense
subalgebra of BpL2 pGqq. More precisely, note that the map R can be extended to an
algebra morphism from BpL2 pGqq to BpL2 pGqq b BpL2 pGqq and the state ω extends to a
normal state on BpL2 pGqq and so does ωt on BpL2 pGn qq where n is the number of leaves of
t. If we consider any weakly dense *-subalgebra M̃ Ă BpL2 pGqq satisfying that RpM̃ q Ă
M̃ b M̃ , we can define a directed system ppM̃t , ωt |M̃t q, t P Tq of *-algebras equipped with
states and state-preserving isometric maps exactly as we did with tM, R, ωu. We will
obtain a limit *-algebra with a state pM˜0 , ̟q
                                             ˜ that we complete via the GNS construction
into a von Neumann algebra pM˜, ̟q.˜ A similar map as the one given in Theorem 3.4 will
provide a state-preserving isomorphism from pM˜, ̟q    ˜ onto pM , ̟q.
Next, we intend to analyze in more depth the couple pM , ̟q and the action of Thompson’s
group V on it. In order to achieve this, we will further assume that the group G is abelian.
3.2. The abelian group case together with a single measure. In this section, we
further assume that the compact separable group G is abelian. The unitary dual G   p is
then given by the Pontryagin dual of G that is a countable discrete abelian group. We
                                                       p is constant.
also assume in this section that the map m : D Ñ ProbpGq
30                  ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

We start by defining the dual version of our analysis using the Fourier transform. Recall
that the Fourier transform is the unitary transformation
                                                  p χ ÞÑ δχ ,
                                UF : L2 pGq Ñ ℓ2 pGq,
where χ is a character of G and δχ is the corresponding delta function of ℓ2 pGq.   p Denote
by λ : G p ñ ℓ2 pGqp the left regular representation and identify ℓ8 pGq p with the operator
of pointwise multiplication action on ℓ2 pGq.  p Observe that AdpUF qpC pGqq “ C ˚ pGq      p is
                                                                                      red
the reduced group C*-algebra. Since G     p is abelian the full and reduced group C*-algebras
coincide and thus we drop the subscript ’red’. We have that AdpUF qpCGq is the C*-
algebra generated by the maps χ ÞÑ χpgq for fixed g P G, i.e. the characters of G.     p It is
a C*-subalgebra of the pointwise multiplication operators that we denote by CharpGq.         p
Identify BpL2 pGqq with Bpℓ2 pGqq  p via the Fourier transform. Under the identification
we obtain that N “ C ˚ pGq,   p Q “ CharpGq     p and M is the crossed-product C*-algebra
CharpGq p ¸G p living inside Bpℓ2 pGqq
                                    p generated by N and Q and where G     p acts on Gp via the
left regular representation that lifts to an action on CharpGq.p Doing the same identification
                                      ˚ p                  pt q and Mt “ CharpG pt q ¸ Gpt . By
at a tree level we obtain Nt “ C pGt q, Qt “ CharpG
our previous work we have that Nt , Qt , Mt are isomorphic to the nth (minimal) tensor
product of N, Q, M if t has n leaves respectively. Note that the Fourier transform swaps
the convolution and pointwise multiplication parts.
Our inclusion map R : BpL2 pGqq Ñ BpL2 pGqq b BpL2 pGqq, b ÞÑ Adpuqpb b idq is then
replaced by
           p :“ AdpUF b UF q ˝ R ˝ AdpUF q : Bpℓ2 pGqq
           R                                       p Ñ Bpℓ2 pGqqbBpℓ
                                                             p       2 p
                                                                      pGqq
and the state ωpbq :“ Trpbλphqq, b P BpL2 pGqq by ω
                                                  p :“ ω ˝AdpUF q. Observe that since G is
abelian the dimension of a unitary representation π is dπ “ 1 and we onlyř have characters
χ instead of matrix coefficients πn,m . Therefore, our function is h “ χPGp h0 pχqχ with
associated measure m P ProbpGq p satisfying mpAq “ ř                       p
                                                        χPA h0 pχq for A Ă G.

Lemma 3.6. We have the equalities:
                            ÿ             ÿ
                          p
                         Rp     bχ λχ q “   bχ λχ b λχ ,
                                     p
                                   χPG            p
                                                χPG

where bχ P CharpGq p and is equal to zero except for finitely many χ P G.
                                                                        p
               p
In particular, RpQq   Ă Q b Q and RpNqp    Ă N b N.
The state ωp satisfies that
                           ÿ            ÿ                ż
                        pp
                        ω    bχ λχ q “    be pgqh0 pgq “   be pgqdmpgq,
                                                          p
                                                          G
                           p
                         χPG               p
                                         gPG

                                  p
where e is the neutral element of G.
Proof. Those are direct consequences of Lemma 3.2.                                            
We obtain two systems of C*-algebras pQt , t P Tq and pNt , t P Tq with C*-completions of
inductive limits written Q0 and N0 respectively. In order to keep notations simples we
write ωt the state on Mt without hat and limit state ̟ also without hat. Before describing
Q0 and N0 we define some limits of groups.
                         GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                  31

Definition 3.7. Consider the group G     pf r of all maps g : D Ñ G
                                                                  p such that there exists a
s.d.p. d1 “ 0 ă d2 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă dn ă dn`1 “ 1 satisfying that g is constant on each half-open
interval rdj , dj`1q X D for 1 ď j ď n.
Denote by G  p D the infinite product of groups ś       p
                                                    dPD G endowed with the product topology
where each copy G    p is equipped with the discrete topology.

                              pf r ñ G
Consider the following action G      pD given by the formula

(3.3)                                             pf r , x P G
                      pg ¨ xqpdq “ gpdqxpdq, @g P G          pD , d P D.

Let bD CharpGq p be the infinite tensor product over the set D of the C*-algebra CharpGq.
                                                                                        p
Note that it is isomorphic to the unique C*-completion of the inductive limit of C*-
algebras CharpG pE q where E runs over every finite subsets of D. The action (3.3) provides
an action of Gpf r over the tensor product bD CharpGqp when we consider it as an algebra
of functions overs GpD .
Denote by uχ , χ P G  pf r the classical embedding of G pf r inside C ˚ pG
                                                                         pf r q. Put mD the
infinite tensor product of the measure m on G.  p We are now able to describe a weakly
dense *-subalgebra of M .
                                                                p ¸alg G
Proposition 3.8. Consider the algebraic crossed-product bD CharpGq       pf r for the
action described above. This *-algebra embeds as a weakly dense *-subalgebra of M .
Moreover,
                              ÿ             ż
                          ̟p      bχ uχ q “   be ptqdmD ptq,
                                                 pD
                                                 G
                                  pf r
                                χPG

where bχ P bD CharpGq p is equal to zero for all but finitely many χ P G  pf r .
The Jones’ action V ñ M0 extends to a state-preserving action V ñ pM , ̟q. Consider
the classical action V ñ D providing the action V ñ G        pD which restricts to V ñ G
                                                                                       pf r .
We obtain the action
                                                  ÿ            ÿ
             V ñ bD CharpGq p ¸alg G pf r , v ¨ p   bχ uχ q :“     bχ pv ´1 ¨quvχ .
                                                  pf r
                                                χPG             pf r
                                                              χPG

that is the restriction of the Jones’ action.

Proof. Let ΨQ , ΨN : F Ñ C*-alg be the tensor functors induced by R     p such that ΨQ p1q “
Q and ΨN p1q “ N. Lemma 3.6 implies that those functors are defined by the map satis-
fying RQ pλχ q “ λχ b λχ , χ P Gp and RN paq “ a b id, a P N. Proposition 1.3 implies that
N0 “ bD N “ bD CharpGq    p the infinite (minimal) tensor product of N.
Consider the tensor functor Υ : F Ñ Gr defined as Υp1q “ G      p and ΥpY qpχq “ pχ, χq P
GpˆG  p where Gr is the category of countable discrete groups with tensor structure given
by direct products. This defines a directed system of groups pG pt , t P Tq. Fix a tree t P T
and consider its s.d.p. d1 “ 0 ă d2 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă dn ă dn`1 “ 1. Embed G      pt into Gpf r via the
map jt pgqpdq “ gi if di ď d ă di`1 . Note that the family of maps pjt , t P Tq is compatible
w.r.t. the directed system of groups and defines an embedding of Ý    lim     p         p
                                                                       ÑtPT Gt into Gf r . By
              pf r this map is clearly surjective.
definition of G
32                       ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

                                  ˚
Consider the functor Cred             : Gr Ñ C*-alg that associates to a countable discrete group Γ its
                                          ˚                                                                ˚
reduced group C*-algebra Cred                pΓq. One can see that the composition of functors Cred           ˝Υ is
                                                                                                            ˚ p
equal to the functor ΨQ . Therefore, Q0 is isomorphic to the reduced C*-algebra C pGf r q.
 Let ιt : CharpG        pt q Ñ bD CharpGq      p and jt : G   pt Ñ G  pf r be the embeddings given by the
directed systems of groups and C*-algebras. Observe that they induce an embedding κt
 of CharpG    p t q ¸alg G  pt inside bD CharpGq    p ¸alg G pf r . Moreover, the family of embedding κt is
 compatible with the directed system of the Mt and thus we obtain an embedding κ at the
 limit of the union of the CharpG                      pt inside the crossed-product bD CharpGq
                                             pt q ¸alg G                                               p ¸alg Gpf r .
 The range of this embedding is dense since the algebras CharpG                       pt q with t P T generate
the tensor product bD CharpGq               p and the C*-algebras C pG   ˚  pt q generate C ˚ pG pf r q. Taking its
inverse and extending it we obtain the desirable embedding.
Consider a tree t with n leaves and put mt the nth tensor power of the probability
              m P ProbpGq.       p Check that if χ P G          pt and bχ P CharpG       p
 measure
     ş                                                     ř                            ř t q, then ωt pbχ λχ q “
 δχ,e Gp t be pχqdmt pχq. This implies that ̟p χPGp f r bχ uχ q “ ̟pbe q for χPGp f r bχ uχ P M0 with
                                                                                                ş
bşχ “ 0 for all but finitely many χ P G             pf r . We conclude by observing that p D ιt pbq dmD “
                                                                                                  G
                                  8
  Gt
     b dm   t  for   any    b P ℓ   pG t q.
 Since the map D Ñ ProbpGq               p is constant we have by Theorem 3.4 that the Jones’ action
is state-preserving and thus extends to an action on the von Neumann algebra M . By
 Proposition 1.3 we have that the Jones’ action restricted to bD CharpGq                    p is the generalized
Bernoulli shift given by V ñ D. The group G                   pf r “ lim G   p
                                                                     ÝÑtPT t is constructed via the tensor
functor Υ : F Ñ Gr and thus carries a Jones’ action V ñ G                         pf r . Consider v P V , there
exists n ě 1, a permutation τ and two s.d.p.: d1 “ 0 ă d2 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă dn ă dn`1 “ 1 and
d11 “ 0 ă d11 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă d1n ă d1n`1 “ 1 such that v sends the interval rdj , dj`1q onto the
interval rd1τ pjq, d1τ pj`1q q. Let t be the tree associated to the first s.d.p. and observe that
an element g P G           pt is a n-tuple pg1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , gn q such that gpdq “ gj if d P rdj , dj`1q as an
element of G      p f r . If we apply v to g we obtain the map vg : D Ñ G           p satisfying vgpd1q “ gj if
   1      1        1                                              1        ´1 1
d P rdσpjq , dσpj`1q q “ vprdj , dj`1qq and thus vgpd q “ gpv d q. This implies that V acts by
shifting the D-indices on G            pf r . All together we obtain the desired formula for the Jones’
action.                                                                                                          
                     ś
Recall that Γ :“ D G is the gauge group that acts on pM , ̟q in a state-preserving
way, see Section 2.5 for details. We describe the gauge group action γ : Γ ñ M in our
current dual picture. Consider a tree t with n leaves with associated s.d.p. d1 “ 0 ă d2 ă
¨ ¨ ¨ ă dn ă dn`1 “ 1. Given a character χ P G     pt there exists χ1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , χn P G
                                                                                     p such that
χ “ χ1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b χn . If s P Γ, we define the quantity
                                                ź
                                                n
(3.4)                                 srχs :“          χj pspdj q´1 spdj`1 qq,
                                                 j“1

and recall that sp1q “ sp0q since we work in the torus. Consider the directed system of
        pt , t P Tq obtained from the tensor functor Υ : F Ñ Gr described by Υp1q “ G
groups pG                                                                                 p
and ΥpY qpχq “ pχ, χq that was introduced in the proof of Proposition 3.8. An easy
computation shows that the map ps, χq ÞÑ srχs is compatible with the directed system of
        pt , t P Tq associated to the functor Υ, i.e. srχs “ srΥpf qpχqs for any s P Γ, t P
groups pG
                          GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                        33

T, χ P Gpt and f P F . We continue to denote by srχs the value of above when χ is in the
limit group Gpf r .

Proposition 3.9. The gauge group action γ : Γ ñ M satisfies the formula:
                            ¨           ˛
                               ÿ              ÿ
                       γpsq ˝     aχ uχ ‚ “     srχsaχ uχ ,
                                        pf r
                                      χPG                 pf r
                                                        χPG

                   p and χ ÞÑ aχ has finite support.
where aχ P bD CharpGq
Proof. By density, it is sufficient to check the formula at a tree level t P T for an element
of the algebraic subalgebra CharpG     pt q¸alg G
                                                pt . Since G is abelian the formula of Proposition
2.10 implies that the gauge group acts trivially on CrGt s which corresponds, in the dual
picture, to CharpG   pt q. It is then sufficient to check that γpsqpuχ q “ srχsuχ for s P Γ and
χPG    p t . Let d1 “ 0 ă d2 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă dn ă dn`1 “ 1 be the s.d.p. associated to t and write
χ “ χ1 b¨ ¨ ¨bχn with χj P G.   p The unitary operator uχ is the conjugation of the continuous
map χ “ χ1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b χn P CpGt q by the Fourier transform. To avoid notational confusions
we write γ 1 the gauge group action in the classical picture of Section 2.5 by opposition
to γ that is the gauge group action in the      śdual   picture. The formula of Proposition 2.10
                                                  n
gives that γ psqpχqpgq “ χpZps qgq “ j“1 χj pspdj q´1 gj spdj`1qq “ srχsχpgq and thus
                1                    ´1

γ 1 psqpχq “ srχsχ. This implies the desired formula once we conjugate this expression with
the Fourier transform.                                                                           
Let pπ, H, Ωq be the triple associated to the GNS construction of pM0 , ̟q. In order to
fully understand the weak completion M we will describe the action of the *-algebra
bD CharpGqp ¸alg Gpf r on H. Given g P Gpf r , we denote by g˚ mD the pushforward measure
defined by the formula
                                                   ź
                      g˚ mD pCq “ mD pg ´1 ¨ Cq “     mD pgpdq´1Cpdqq,
                                                        dPD
                                      ś
for any measurable cylinder C “          dPD Cpdq.

Lemma 3.10. There exists a unitary transformation
                                     à 2 D
                          W :HÑ             p , k˚ mD q
                                         L pG
                                                 pf r
                                               kPG

satisfying that
       AdpW qπpaqpξk qkPGp f r “ paξk qkPGp f r and AdpW qπpug qpξk qkPGp f r “ pξgg´1k qkPGp f r
                    p gPG
for all a P bD CharpGq, pf r and vector ξ “ pξk q p where ξ g´1 pxq :“ ξg´1 k pg ´1xq.
                                                 kPGf r    g k

Proof. Set B :“ bD CharpGq     p that we consider as a space of maps from GpD to C. By
definition of the GNS construction and by Proposition 3.8 we have that H is the closure
of B ¸alg G pf r w.r.t. the inner product xξ, ηy :“ ̟pη ˚ξq. Decompose the vector space
B ¸alg G                                                                     pf r , then
        pf r as the direct sum ‘ p Buk . Observe that if ξ, η P B and g, k P G
                                    kPGf r
                                          #ş
                                                        D
                                             D ηξ dpg˚ m q if g “ k
                          xξug , ηuk y “ Gp                         .
                                           0 otherwise
34                 ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

                                           p D , k˚ mD q and write W this unitary transfor-
Therefore, H » ‘kPGp f r Hk where Hk “ L2 pG
mation.
The other equalities are routine computations.                                           
Recall that two measures on a measure space are singular if their supports are disjoint
and are equivalent (i.e. are in the same measure class) if they have the same null sets. We
recall the fundamental theorem of Kakutani for infinite products of measures that will be
useful for our study.
Theorem 3.11. [37] Let X be a measurable space with two infinite family of probability
measures pµd , νd , d P Dq. Assume that µd is equivalent to νd for any d P D and put µ :“
bdPD µd and ν :“ bdPD νd the infinite tensor products of measures defined
                                                                        ř on athe product
σ-algebra of the product space X D . Denote by ρpµd , ρd q the quantity χPGp µd pχqνd pχq
that is in p0, 1s. Then the measure µ and ν are either equivalent or singular with each
other. Moreover, they are equivalent if and only if
                                   ÿ
                                ´     logpρpµd , νd qq ă `8.
                                   dPD

We deduce the following lemma.
Lemma 3.12. The measures g˚ mD and g˚1 mD are mutually singular if and only if there
                                                         pf r . Otherwise the measures are
exists d P D such that gpdq˚m ‰ g 1 pdq˚m where g, g 1 P G
                    p is torsion free, then the family of measures pg˚ mD , g P G
equal. If the group G                                                             pf r q are
mutually singular.
Proof. Consider g, g 1 P G pf r and assume that there exists d0 P D satisfying gpd0q˚ m ‰
 1                         1
g pd0 q˚ m. Since g and g are locally constant we can find an infinite subset E Ă D such
that gpdq “ gpd0 q and g 1 pdq “ g 1 pd0 q for any d P E. We have that
             ÿ                                    ÿ
          ´     logpρpgpdq˚m, g 1 pdq˚ mqq ě ´        logpρpgpdq˚m, g 1 pdq˚ mqq
           dPD                                dPE
                                         “ ´|E| logpρpgpd0q˚ m, g 1pd0 q˚ mqq “ `8.
Kakutani’s theorem implies that the measures g˚ mD and g˚1 mD are mutually singular. If
such a d does not exists, then by definition the two measures g˚ mD and g˚1 mD are equal.
Assume that G    p is torsion free and let χ P G
                                               p satisfying that χ˚ m “ m. If χ ‰ e, then
   p ě mpχ q “ |Z|mptχuq “ `8, a contradiction. Hence, χ “ e. Therefore, if the two
mpGq           Z

measures g˚ mD and g˚1 mD are equivalent, then gpdqg 1pdq´1 “ e for any d P D implying
that g “ g 1 .                                                                         
                        p of g such that g˚ m “ m and set
Define the subgroup N ă G
                                        pf r , gpdq P N, @d P Du.
                           Nf r :“ tg P G
        pf r {Nf r Ñ G
Let σ : G            pf r be a section and consider the cocycle
                     pf r ˆ G
                   κ:G      pf r {Nf r Ñ Nf r , pg, γq ÞÑ σpgγq´1gσpγq.
Define the group action
(3.5)              p f r ñ pG
                   G        pD ˆ G
                                 pf r {Nf r q, g ¨ pz, γq :“ pκpg, γqz, gγq.
                           GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                       35

Equipped the space G  pD ˆ G  pf r {Nf r with the measure mD b µc where µc is the counting
measure. Since Nf r acts in a p.m.p. way on pG      p D , mD q we obtain that the action G
                                                                                         pf r ñ
 pD ˆ G
pG    pf r {Nf r , mD b µc q is measure preserving. We write
                         B :“ L8 pG   pD ˆ G pf r {Nf r , mD b µc q ¸ G
                                                                      pf r
the crossed-product von Neumann algebra. Observe that since the measure is invariant
under the action we have that B does not have any type III component. Consider the
unique normal state ̟B on B satisfying that
                             ÿ            ż
                        ̟B p    Ag vg q “   Ae pz, ēqdmD pzq,
                                                   pD
                                                   G
                                    pf r
                                  gPG

where Ag P L8 pG pD ˆ Gpf r {Nf r , mD bµc q for g P G
                                                     pf r and where vs , s P G
                                                                             pf r denotes the uni-
taries of B implementing the action. There is a natural action of Thompson’s group V ñ
D induced by its action on the unit interval. This provides an action on G          pD consisting
in shifting indices that restricts to the subgroup G   p f r and passes to the quotient G  pf r {Nf r .
                                                                               ´ř                ¯
Write αB : V ñ B the action induced by those three (i.e. αB pvq                      p f r Ag ug
                                                                                   gPG             “
ř                                       8 pD
             ´1                                     p            D
     p Ag pv ¨quvg for v P V, Ag P L pG ˆ Gf r {Nf r , m b µc q ) which clearly acts by
  gPGf r
automorphisms letting the state ̟B invariant.
We are now able to prove the main theorem of this section.
Theorem 3.13. Let G be a compact abelian separable group and m P ProbpGq       p a strictly
positive probability measure. We have a state-preserving isomorphism of von Neumann
algebras
                                    ψ : pM , ̟q Ñ pB, ̟B q
and in particular M does not have any type III component. Moreover, the Jones’ action
α : V ñ M preserves the state ̟ and is conjugate to the action αB , i.e. Adpψq ˝ α “ αB .
   p is torsion free (e.g. G is the circle group), then pM , ̟q is isomorphic to
If G
                              p D , mD qbBpℓ2 pG
                         pL8 pG                 p f r qq, mD b x¨δe , δe yq,
which is a type I8 von Neumann algebra with a diffuse center and equipped with a non-
faithful state.
                                  p
If G is a finite group and m is G-invariant     (i.e. m is the Haar measure of G),p then
pM , ̟q is isomorphic to the hyperfinite type II1 factor equipped with its trace.
Proof. Put pX, µq :“ pGpD ˆ G  p f r {Nf r , mD b µc q. Consider the group action of (3.5):
      pf r ñ pX, µq, g ¨ pz, γq “ pσpgγq´1 gσpγqz, gγq, g P G
      G                                                          pf r , z P G
                                                                            pD , γ P G
                                                                                     pf r {Nf r
and recall that it is measure preserving. If ξ : X Ñ C is any map and g P G      pf r , we write
  g            g            ´1
ξ the map ξ pxq :“ ξpg xq, x P X forřthis action.
Write elements of B as formal sums gPGp f r Ag vg with Ag P L8 pX, µq. Assume that B
is represented on the Hilbert space K :“ L2 pX, µq b ℓ2 pG    pf r q and acts in the following
classical way:
                                    vg pξ b δk q :“ ξ g b δgk
           pf r , ξ P L2 pX, µq and
for g, k P G
                                       Apξ b δk q “ pAξq b δk
36                       ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

where pAξqpyq :“ Apyqξpyq and A P L8 pX, µq.
                  p we define the map
Given a P bD CharpGq
                         ψpaq P L8 pX, µq such that ψpaqpz, γq :“ apσpγqzq,
        pD, γ P G
for z P G       pf r {Nf r . We easily check that ψpaq “ ψpaq and that ψpag q “ ψpaqg
                      p g P G
for any a P bD CharpGq,       pf r where ag pyq :“ apg ´1 yq for y P G
                                                                     pD . This defines the
*-morphism
                                                 ÿ             ÿ
              ψ : bD CharpGq p ¸alg Gpf r Ñ B,       ag ug ÞÑ      ψpag qvg .
                                                                            pf r
                                                                          gPG                       pf r
                                                                                                  gPG

Moreover,
               ˜               ¸                ˜                  ¸
                   ÿ                                ÿ
      ̟B ˝ ψ           ag ug       “ ̟B                 ψpag qvg
                   g                                g
                                       ż                                           ż
                                                                   D
                                   “            ψpae qpz, ēqdm pzq “                       ae pσpēqzqdmD pzq
                                           pD                                          pD
                                       żG                                              G

                                   “    ae pzqdmD pzq since σpēq P Nf r implies σpēq˚ mD “ mD
                                     pD
                                     G
                                      ˜          ¸
                                        ÿ
                                   “̟       ag ug .
                                                g

Therefore, ψ is a densely defined *-morphism from pM , ̟q to pB, ̟B q that is state-
preserving.
Let us prove that ψ extends to a normal isomorphism from M onto B. Identify K with
              pD , mD q b ℓ2 pG
the space L2 pG               pf r {Nf r q b ℓ2 pG
                                                 pf r q. Under this identification we have that

                                       vg pη b δγ b δk q “ η κpg,γq b δgγ b δgk
and
                            Apη b δγ b δk q “ pAp¨, γqηq b δγ b δk
           pf r , η P L2 pG
for g, k P G              pD , mD q, γ P G
                                         pf r {Nf r and A P L8 pX, µq. In particular, if a P
          p then
bD CharpGq,
(3.6)                              ψpaqpη b δγ b δk q “ papσpγq¨qηq b δγ b δk .
            pf r {Nf r consider the subspace
For any γ P G
                      ÿ                                      ÿ
            Kγ :“ t                                pD , mD q, }ηk }2 ă 8u Ă K
                          ηk b δkγ b δk , ηk P L2 pG
                            pf r
                          kPG                                                                 k

and observe that is is closed under the action of B making it a B-module. We have the
following decomposition into B-modules:
                                                        K “ ‘γPGpf r {Nf r Kγ .
Consider the transformation
                                                                        ÿ
                                    p D , k˚ mD q,
            Uγ : Kγ Ñ ‘kPGp f r L2 pG                                           ηk b δkγ b δk ÞÑ pηk
                                                                                                           σpkγq
                                                                                                                   qkPGp f r
                                                                         pf r
                                                                       kPG
                               GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                            37

and check that it is a unitary transformation. Moreover, it satisfies that

                                              Uγ ψpaug qξ “ πpaug qUγ ξ

for any ξ P Kγ and a P bD CharpGq,             p g P G    pf r where pπ, Hq is the GNS representation
associated to pbD CharpGq       p ¸alg G pf r , ̟q described in Lemma 3.10.
Therefore, Uγ provides an isomorphism between the bD CharpGq                   p ¸alg G  pf r -modules Kγ and
the GNS module H given by the state ̟. We obtain that bD CharpGq                          p ¸alg G pf r -module
K is isomorphic to a direct sum of copies H indexed by G                   pf r {Nf r . This implies that ψ
extends to an isomorphism from M onto the weak closure of the range of ψ.
Let us show that the range of ψ is weakly dense inside B. The set of unitary opera-
tors pvg , g P G   pf r q is by definition in the range of ψ. Therefore, it is sufficient to prove
that the weak closure of ψpbD CharpGqq            p is equal to L8 pX, µq. For g P G            pf r we define
the representation πg : bD CharpGq          p Ñ BpL2 pG      pD , g˚ mD qq where the maps act by point-
wise multiplications. Observe that the range of πg is weakly dense inside L8 pG                     pD , g˚ mD q
since CharpGq     p is weakly dense inside ℓ8 pGq        p and since L8 pG      p D , g˚ mD q is obtained by
                                                             8 p
performing the infinite tensor product bdPD pℓ pGq, gpdq˚mq. By Lemma 3.12 the fam-
ily of measures pσpγq˚ mD , γ P G          pf r {Nf r q are mutually singular implying that the rep-
resentations pπσpγq , γ P G     pf r {Nf r q are mutually disjoint. A classical argument (see for
instance [2, Chapter 2]) states that the weak completion of a sum of disjoint repre-
sentations is the sum of the weak completions implying that the weak completion of
                                 p is equal to ‘ p
‘γPGp f r {Nf r πσpγq pbD CharpGqq                                    8 pD             D                8
                                                        γPGf r {Nf r L pG , σpγq˚ m q. Identify L pX, µq
with the direct sum ‘ p                  L2 pG  pD , σpγq˚ mD q and observe that K, as a L8 pX, µq-
                               γPGf r {Nf r
                                                                                p D , σpγq˚ mD q.
module, is isomorphic to a direct sum of the regular module ‘γPGp f r {Nf r L2 pG
Equation 3.6 gives that the range ψpbD CharpGqqp is under this identification the diagonal
subalgebra ‘ p                       p Therefore, the weak closure of ψpbD CharpGqq
                      πσpγq pbD CharpGqq.                                                    p
                γPGf r {Nf r
is indeed equal to L8 pX, µq implying that the range of ψ is weakly dense inside B.
Since mD b µc is invariant for the action of G    pf r , we obtain that the von Neumann crossed-
product B has direct summands of type I or II.
Let α : V ñ M be the Jones’ action that is state-preserving by Theorem 3.4. Proposition
3.8 implies that the actions Adpψq ˝ α and αB coincide on the subalgebra ψpbD CharpGq                p ¸
Gpf r q that is weakly dense and are thus equal.
If Gp is torsion free, then Lemma 3.12 implies that Nf r is trivial. This implies that the
cocycle κ is trivial and thus the action G p f r ñ pG p D ˆG p f r q is given by the formula g¨px, kq :“
px, gkq. Therefore, B “ L8 pG    pD , mD qbℓ8 pG pf r q ¸ Gpf r » L8 pG    pD , mD qbBpℓ2 pG
                                                                                           pf r qq, where
b refers to the von Neumann crossed-product. The statement about the state is obvious.
Assume that G     p is a finite group and that m is G-invariant.
                                                             p                  Therefore, N “ G    p and
thus ř  Nf r “ Gpf r . Hence, B “ L8 pG  pD , mD q ¸ G   pf r for the action g ¨ x “ gx. We have
                          D
̟B p gPGp f r ag vg q “ m pae q. This state is clearly faithful and is tracial implying that B is
of finite type. Moreover, B is generated by a net of finite factors Bpℓ2 pGt qq, t P T implying
that B is a factor by [48, Chapt. XIV, 2, Lem. 2.13] and is manifestly hyperfinite since
Bpℓ2 pGt qq is finite dimensional for any t P T. Since B is infinite dimensional we obtain
that pB, ̟B q is necessarily the hyperfinite II1 factor equipped with its trace.                        
38                  ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

Remark 3.14. Observe that at a tree-level Mt our state ωt is faithful and in general
nontracial. Using Tomita-Takesaki theory, this gives us a nontrivial time evolution for
our system. Unfortunately, at the limit, the state ̟ is no longer faithful unless it is
tracial. One classical method to palliate the non-faithfulness is to consider a maximal
projection p P M such that ̟ is faithful on the compression pM p and to consider
ppM p, ̟ppq´1̟pp ¨ pqq. Unfortunately, in our case, we will always end up with a tracial
state and thus with a trivial time evolution. For example, if G p is torsion free, we will
have that ppM p, ̟ppq´1̟pp ¨ pqq is the commutative von Neumann algebra L8 pG     pD , mD q
                             D
together with the measure m for a state.
Remark 3.15. One can easily recover the algebras of fields M pOq for O a connected open
subset of the torus. Indeed, in the definition of B replace each D by the subset DpOq
and use the appropriate embeddings/projections for having a description of M pOq Ă M
in term of crossed-products von Neumann algebras.
3.3. The circle group case together with a family of heat-kernel states. From
now one consider the circle group G “ S and its Pontryagin dual G  p that we identify with
the infinite cyclic group Z. For any b ą 0, we define the heat-kernel states, cp. Remark
3.1,
                                          2
                                       e´n b{2            ÿ      2
                      hb : Z Ñ R, n ÞÑ         where Zb “     e´n b{2 .
                                         Zb               nPZ

This defines a probability measure mb P ProbpZq via the formula
                                        ÿ
                              mb pAq “     hb pnq, A Ă Z.
                                           nPA

Next, we consider a map β : D Ñ Rą0 and consider the family of functions, measures
and states indexed by d P D:
                                           2
                                       e´n βpdq{2
                           hβpdq pnq “            , n P Z;
                                         Zβpdq
                                       ÿ e´n2 βpdq{2
                          mβpdq pAq “                 , A Ă Z;
                                       nPA
                                             Zβpdq
                           ωβpdq paq “ Trpaλphβpdq qq, a P Bpℓ2 pZqq.

Equipped ZD with the product σ-algebra ΣD generated by cylinders and define the prod-
uct probability measure mD                            D    D
                             β :“ bdPD mβpdq on pZ , Σ q. Define the countable discrete
abelian group Zf r of maps g : D Ñ Z satisfying that there exists a s.d.p. d1 “ 0 ă d2 ă
¨ ¨ ¨ ă dn ă dn`1 “ 1 such that g is constant on each half-open interval rdj , dj`1q, 1 ď j ď n.
Consider the action
(3.7)                      θ : Zf r ñ ZD , pg ¨ xqpdq “ gpdq ` xpdq.
Using Theorem 3.11, we obtain the following criteria.
Proposition 3.16. The action θ : Zf r ñ ZD is nonsingular w.r.t. the measure mD
                                                                              β if
                 1
                           ř
and only if β P ℓ pDq, i.e. dPD βpdq ă 8.
                             GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                           39

Proof. Consider an integer k P Z, a real number b ą 0 and the associated heat-kernel
measure mb . Observe that
                                 ÿa
               ρpk˚ mb , mb q :“    mb pn ´ kqmb pnq
                                        nPZ
                                        ÿ
                                   “          Zb´1 expp´pn ´ kq2 b{4 ´ n2 b{4q
                                        nPZ
                                                                 ÿ
                                   “ Zb´1 expp´k 2 b{8q                expp´pn ´ k{2q2 b{2q.
                                                                 nPZ
We treat two cases. Assume that k is even. Then
                    ÿ                         ÿ
                       expp´pn ´ k{2q2 b{2q “   expp´n2 b{2q “ Zb
                      nPZ                                      nPZ
                                        2
and thus ρpk˚ mb , mb q “ expp´k b{8q.
Assume that k is odd. Let us show that ρpk˚ mb , mb q „bÑ0 expp´k 2 b{8q. Observe that
                                             ÿ
         ρpk˚ mb , mb q “ Zb´1 expp´k 2 b{8q   expp´p2n ´ kq2 b{8q
                                                       nPZ
                                                       ÿ
                          “ Zb´1 expp´k 2 b{8q               expp´p2n ´ 1q2 b{8q
                                                       nPZ
                                                       ÿ                         ÿ
                          “ Zb´1 expp´k 2 b{8qr              expp´p2 b{8q ´            expp´p2qq2 b{8qs
                                                       pPZ                       qPZ

                          “ Zb´1 expp´k 2 b{8qrZb{4 ´ Zb s
                                          Zb{4 ´ Zb
                          “ expp´k 2 b{8q           .
                                             Zb

                                                              ř          2
We now approximate Zb . Consider the theta function θpzq “ kPZ eiπk z defined on the
upper half-plane and recall the Jacobi-Poisson inversion formula that is
(3.8)                                       θp´z ´1 q2 “ ´izθpzq2 .
In particular,               c                           c              8
                                 2π ÿ ´2π2 n2 {b              2π       ÿ     2     2
                    Zb “                e        “               p1 ` 2 pe´2π {b qn q.
                                  b nPZ                        b       n“1
Observe that
                    8
                    ÿ                         8
                                              ÿ                              2
                          ´2π 2 {b n2               ´2π 2 {b n      e´2π {b
                        pe         q qď           pe         q q“              ÑbÑ0 0.
                    n“1                       n“1
                                                                  1 ´ e´2π2 {b
This implies that
                                               Zb{4 ´ Zb
                 ρpk˚ mb , mb q “ expp´k 2 b{8q           „bÑ0 expp´k 2 b{8q.
                                                  Zb
Note that this approximation is uniform w.r.t. the variable k.
We obtain that
                                                    bk 2
(3.9)                   ´ logpρpk˚ mb , mb qq „bÑ0       for any k P Z.
                                                     8
Consider g P Zfřr that is nonzero. Then gpdq ‰ 0 for infinitely many values and implying
that the series dPD ´ logpρpgpdq˚ mβpdq , mβpdq qq diverges if β does not tend to zero. We
40                  ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

can thus assume that β tends to zero at infinity and since g is bounded we obtain that
                                                        2
´ logpρpgpdq˚ mβpdq , mβpdq qq is equivalent to βpdqgpdq
                                                    8
                                                          at infinity in d P D. By Kakutani’s
                                    D      D
theorem, we conclude that g˚ mβ » mβ if and only if β is summable finishing the proof
of the proposition.                                                                        
Note that the proof of the last proposition implies the following statement: for any map
                                                                  2
g : D Ñ Z we have that g˚ mD        D
                             β » mβ if and only if d P D ÞÑ gpdq βpdq is summable.
Consider the setting described in Section 3.2 applied to Gp “ Z with Mt “ CharpZt q ¸ Zt
                         2
the C*-subalgebra of Bpℓ pZt qq generated by CharpZt q acting by pointwise multiplication
and the group ring CrZt s acting by convolution. They are equipped with the state ωt
satisfying                        ˜         ¸ ż
                                    ÿ
                               ωt      bg ug “      be dmt ,
                                          gPZt                     Zt

where mt “ mβpd1 q b ¨ ¨ ¨ b mβpdn q and d1 “ 0 ă d2 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă dn ă dn`1 “ 1 is the
s.d.p. associated to the tree t P T. Proposition 3.8 applied to this specific example gives
that the inductive limit of C*-algebras M0 contains densely the *-algebra bD CharpZq¸alg
Zf r and satisfies the following formula for the Jones’ action:
                                          ÿ              ÿ
                      α : V ñ M0 , αpvqp       bg ug q “    bg pv ´1 ¨quvg ,
                                                   gPZf r               gPZf r

with bg P bD CharpZq and g ÞÑ bg finitely supported. Moreover, the state satisfies the
following formula            ¨            ˛
                                ÿ             ż
                          ̟˝        bg ug ‚ “    be dmD
                                                      β.
                                         gPZf r                   ZD

We let the reader verify these formulae which are all easy consequences of the preceding
sections.
Let pM , ̟q be the weak completion of M0 w.r.t. ̟ and the normal extension of this
state. The next theorem relates our action θ (see (3.7)) and the von Neumann algebra
M.
Theorem 3.17. If β P ℓ1 pDq, then there exists an isomorphism of von Neumann algebras
                                J : M Ñ L8 pZD , mD
                                                  β q ¸ Zf r

satisfying                                                    ż
                                          ÿ
                                ´1
                          ̟˝J        p            bg ug q “            be pxqdmD
                                                                               β pxq,
                                         gPZf r                   ZD

where pug , g P Zf r q implements the unitary action of Zf r on L8 pZD , mD
                                                                          β q.

Proof. If β is in ℓ1 pDq, then the action θ : Zf r ñ pZD , mD
                                                            β q is nonsingular by Proposition
3.16. The description of ̟ and the definition of crossed-product von Neumann algebras
for nonsingular actions implies the rest of the theorem.                                    
Next, we prove that the action is ergodic for a large class of choices of β. The proof is rather
indirect and uses the fact that the action of the group ‘D Z ñ pZD , mD      β q is ergodic. Let
       D   D
AutpZ , mβ q be the group of all nonsingular transformations of the probability measure
space pZD , mD
             β q. We equipped it with the weak topology also called coarse topology, see
                              GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                  41

[19]. It confers to AutpZD , mD β q a structure of Polish topological group. A sequence
gn converges to g for the weak topology if the sequence of associated Radon-Nikodym
           dgn mD                dg˚ mD
derivatives dm˚ D β converges to dmDβ inside L1 pZD , mD
                                                       β q and if for any measurable subset
                 β                           β
                                        ´1    ´1
A Ă ZD we have that limnÑ8 mD      β pg A∆gn Aq “ 0. This topology makes strongly
                                              2
continuous the action of AutpZD , mD             D    D
                                      β q on L pZ , mβ q. We will show that for certain
choices of β we have that ‘D Z is in the closure of Zf r inside AutpZD , mD
                                                                          β q.

Proposition 3.18. Consider β : D Ñ Rą0 such that there exists 0 ă p ă 1{2 such that
β is in ℓp pDq. Then the group ‘D Z is in the closure of Zf r inside the topological group
AutpZD , mD β q.

Proof. Consider β and 0 ă p ă 1{2 satisfying that β P ℓp pDq. Let g̃n P Zf r be the element
defined as g̃n pdq “ 1 if 0 ď d ă 1{2n and 0 otherwise. We want to show that g̃n converges
weakly to g P ‘D Z that is the function gpdq “ 1 if d “ 0 and 0 otherwise. Note that ‘D Z
is obviously a subgroup of AutpZD , mD  β q since any of its element will only change finitely
many of the measures mβpdq into an equivalent one. Note that g̃n tends to g if and only if
gn tends to the identity where gn pdq “ 1 if 1 ă d ă 1{2n and 0 otherwise. Denote by ϕβ
                                          dgn ˚ mD
                                                 β
the Radon-Nikodym derivative               dmD
                                                      and note that
                                             β


                                       ź                                  d1˚ mβpdq
                            ϕβ “                  fβpdq , where fβpdq “             .
                                   dPD:1ădă1{2n
                                                                           dmβpdq

Observe that fb pnq “ ep2n´1qb{2 for any b ą 0 and n P Z and define the subset

                               Xd :“ tn P Z : |fβpdq pnq ´ 1| ď βpdqp u.

We notice that, up to the endpoints, Xd is equal to the interval
                                      logp1 ´ βpdqp q         logp1 ` βpdqp q
                             p1{2 `                   , 1{2 `                 q
                                           βpdq                    βpdq
that is roughly equal to p´βpdqp´1, βpdqp´1q when d Ñ 8 (for the Fréchet
                                                                   ?      filter on D).
Classical formula on Poisson summations provides that mb p´N, Nq „ 1 ´ e´N 2 b{2 when
b Ñ 0, N Ñ 8. This implies that
                                                                      2p´1 {2
                                                           e´βpdq
                                   ´ logpmβpdq pXd qq „dÑ8                      .
                                                                2
Write Dpnq the set of dyadic rational inside p0, 1{2n q and consider the cylinder
                                        ź
                              X pnq “       Xd ˆ ZDzDpnq .
                                                     dPDpnq
                                      ř
We have that ´ logpX pnq q “            dPDpnq ´ logpmβpdq pXd qq whose coefficient is equivalent at
                  2p´1 {2
           e´βpdq
infinity to    2
                    and is thus convergent since βpdq1´2p is in some ℓq pDq spaces. This
                                 pnq                                pnq
implies that limnÑ8 ´ logpmDβ pX     qq “ 0 and thus limnÑ8 mD β pX     q “ 1. If we shift
  pnq
X by one unit we also obtain that its measure tends to one.
42                  ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

Observe that
                          ż                            ż
          }ϕgn ´ 1}1 ď                |ϕgn ´ 1|dmD
                                                 β `                   |ϕgn ´ 1|dmD
                                                                                  β
                              X pnq                        ZD zX pnq
                          ż
                                                                   pnq              pnq
                      ď               |ϕgn ´ 1|dmD         D   D
                                                 β ` gn ˚ mβ pZ zX     q ` mD   D
                                                                            β pZ zX     q
                              X pnq
                                                      pnq              pnq
                      ď sup |ϕgn ´ 1| ` gn ˚ mD   D
                                              β pZ zX     q ` mD   D
                                                               β pZ zX     q.
                          X pnq



By our previous discussion we have that the ř two right terms tend to řzero. By definition we
have that if x P X pnq , then logpϕgn pxqq “ dPDpnq logpfβpdq pxpdqqq ď dPDpnq logp1`βpdqp q.
                                          ř
We have a similar lower bound that is dPDpnq logp1´βpdqpq. Note that at infinity the prin-
cipal term of the series is equivalent to βpdqp that is summable implying that logpϕgn pxqq
converges uniformly to 0 when n tends to infinity. Therefore, limnÑ8 supX pnq |ϕgn ´ 1| “ 0
implying that limnÑ8 }ϕgn ´ 1}1 “ 0.
Consider śa measurable subset A Ă ZD and ε ą 0. Recall that an elementary cylinder is of
the form dPD Cd with Cd “ Z for all but finitely many d and that the σ-algebra of ZD is
generated by them. There exists an elementary cylinder C satisfying that mD    β pA∆Cq ă ε.
Observe that for n large enough we have that gn C “ C since the support of gn will
eventually be contained in the set of d satisfying Cd “ Z. Observe that
           ´1                              ´1        D ´1        ´1            D ´1
mD                    D            D
   β pA∆gn Aq ď mβ pA∆Cq ` mβ pC∆gn Cq ` mβ pgn C∆gn Aq ď ε ` mβ pgn pC∆Aqq

                                        ´1
                                                     ş
for n large enough. Moreover, mD                                   D
                                    β pgn pC∆Aqq “ C∆A ϕgn dmβ and this quantity tends
                                                                              1
to mD                                                                            D
       β pC∆Aq since the Radon-Nikodym derivative ϕgn tends to one in L pZ , mβ q im-
                                                                                      D
                    ´1
plying that mD                           D
               β pgn pC∆Aqq ď ε ` mβ pC∆Aq ď 2ε for n large enough. We obtain that
                   ´1
limnÑ8 mD                                                                      D   D
           β pA∆gn Aq “ 0 and thus gn tends to the identity e inside AutpZ , mβ q. Since
any g̃n is in Zf r we get that g belongs to the closure Zf r . Given any other Dirac element
gd0 at another dyadic rational d0 (i.e. gd0 pd0 q “ 1 and gd0 pdq “ 0, @d ‰ d0 ) we can
adapt the proof of above to obtain that gd0 P Zf r . Since Zf r is a group and since ‘D Z
is generated by those Dirac elements we obtain that ‘D Z is contained inside the closure
Zf r .                                                                                    

We deduce the ergodicity of our action.
Corollary 3.19. If β : D Ñ Rą0 is p-summable for some 0 ă p ă 1{2, then the action
θ : Zf r ñ pZD , mD
                  β q is ergodic.

Proof. We start by showing that the action of ‘D Z is ergodic. Consider the crossed-
product von Neumann algebra Nβ :“ L8 pZD , mD      β q¸‘D Z and observe that it is isomorphic
to the infinite tensor product
                       â 8                            â
                          pL pZ, mβpdq q ¸ Z, ϕd q “    pBpℓ2 pZqq, ϕd q,
                      dPD                                       dPD

where ϕd is the state defined as
                               ÿ
                      ϕd pxq “   xxδk , δk ymβpdq ptkuq, x P Bpℓ2 pZqq.
                                       kPZ
                           GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                 43

By [48, XIV, Corollary 1.10] we have that Nβ is a factor since it is the GNS completion of
a tensor product of factors w.r.t. to a tensor product state. This implies that the action
‘D Z ñ pZD , mD    β q is necessarily ergodic.
Consider X Ă ZD a measurable subset that is invariant under the action of Zf r . By conti-
nuity, it is also invariant for the closure Zf r inside AutpZD , mD
                                                                  β q and thus, by Proposition
3.18, is invariant under the action of ‘D Z. Since this group acts in an ergodic way we
obtain that X has measure one or zero implying that the action of Zf r is ergodic.           
The next theorem described the structure of M that is radically different from the case
where β is constant, see Theorem 3.13.
Theorem 3.20. Consider β : D Ñ Rą0 that is in ℓp pDq for some 0 ă p ă 1{2 and the
action θ : Zf r ñ pZD , mD
                         β q. Then θ is nonsingular, free, ergodic and of type III.
In particular, the von Neumann algebra M is a hyperfinite type III factor.
Proof. The action is nonsingular by Proposition 3.16, ergodic by Corollary 3.19 and is
obviously free by definition.
Assume that the action is of type I or II. Since the action is ergodic, there exists a measure
µ in the measure class of mD β that is Zf r -invariant. By continuity, this measure is invariant
for the action of the closure Zf r and in particular is ‘D Z-invariant by Proposition 3.18.
As in the proof of Corollary 3.19 we consider the factor Nβ :“ L8 pZD , mD          β q ¸ ‘D Z
that is isomorphic to an infinite tensor product of type I factor equipped with states ϕd .
This factor is semi-finite since mDβ is equivalent to a ‘D Z-invariant measure. Denote by
           ř
Trpxq :“ kPZ xxδk , δk y the normal
                               ř       faithful tracial weight of Bpℓ2 pZqq and observe that
ϕd pxq “ Trpxhd q where hd “ kPZ mβpdq ptkuqek,k and where pek,l , k, l P Zq is the classical
system of matrix units of Bpℓ2 pZqq. Moreover, by [48, XIV, Theorem 1.14], this factor is
semi-finite if and only if
                               ÿ
                      Sptq :“     p1 ´ | Trph1`it
                                                d  q|q ă 8 for any t P R.
                                dPD

We will show this series diverges for t “ 1. Observe that
                              ř      ´k 2 βpdqp1`iq{2
                                                        ř      ´k 2 βpdqp1`iq{2
                       1`i      kPZ e                    řkPZ e
                  Trphd q “             1`i           “                         .
                                      Zβpdq             p ℓPZ e´ℓ2 βpdq{2 q1`i
The Jacobi-Poisson formula (3.8) implies that
                                 ˜           ¸2
                                   ÿ      2          π
                                       e´k z    „zÑ0
                                   kPZ
                                                     z
for a complex number z with strictly positive real part. We obtain that when d P D goes
to infinity (and thus βpdq tends to zero) we have that
                                ř         2
                        1`i       kPZ e´k βpdqp1`iq{2           1 1{2
                  | Trphd q| “ | ř       ´ℓ 2 βpdq{2  | ÑdÑ8 |     | ‰1
                                    ℓPZ e                      1`i
implying that the series Sp1q diverges. Therefore, Nβ is not semi-finite, a contradiction.
Therefore, mD  β does not admit any equivalent Zf r -invariant measure and thus the action θ
is of type III. Since M is isomorphic to the crossed-product L8 pZD , mD β q ¸ Zf r we obtain
that M is a type III factor. Moreover, it is hyperfinite since Zf r is abelian.            
44                   ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

We provide a class of geometric examples of β satisfying the hypothesis of the last theorem.

Example 3.21. Consider β :“ βτ pdq “ pd1 ´ dqτ where τ ą 2 is fixed and pd, d1 q is the
largest s.d.i. starting at d. We claim that this choice of β provides a nonsingular free
ergodic action ατ : Zf r ñ pZD , mD
                                  β q of type III. To prove it it is sufficient to show that β
is in ℓ pDq for some 0 ă p ă 1{2 by Theorem 3.20. Write Dn :“ td P D : β1 pdq “ 2´n u
       p

and observe that |Dn | “ 2n´1 if n ě 1. Since τ ą 2, there exists 0 ă p ă 1{2 such that
pτ ą 1. We obtain

                       ÿ               8 ÿ
                                       ÿ
                             βpdqp “              βpdqp
                       dPD             n“0 dPDn
                                           8
                                           ÿ             ˆ        ˙pτ
                                                             1
                                  “1`            |Dn |
                                           n“1
                                                             2n
                                           ÿ8             ÿ8
                                          2n´1
                                  “1`       npτ
                                                “ 1 ` 1{2    p2n q1´pτ
                                      n“1
                                          2               n“1




that is summable since pτ ą 1.

Remark 3.22. Theorem 3.20 provides a type III factor pM , ̟q equipped with a faithful
state. By Tomita-Takesaki theory we obtain a nontrivial modular action R ñ M that
we interpret as a time-evolution on our continuum limit algebra M .

The next proposition shows that the choice of βτ above gives a measure mD
                                                                        β that is not
quasi-invariant under the action of Thompson’s groups.

Proposition 3.23. Consider β :“ βτ pdq “ pd1 ´ dqτ where τ ą 1 is fixed and pd, d1 q is the
largest s.d.i. starting at d. Let mD                                             D
                                   β :“ bdPD mβpdq be the associated measure on Z . Then
the generalized Bernoulli action of Thompson’s group F

                   κ : F ñ ZD , κv pxqpdq “ xpv ´1 dq, v P V, x P ZD , d P D

is singular w.r.t. the measure mD
                                β .
In particular, the Jones’ action α : F ñ M0 does not extends to an action on the von
Neumann algebra M .

Proof. Consider v P F and observe that κ´1        D
                                             v ˚ mβ “ bdPD mβpvdq . By Kakutani’s theorem
(see [37]) we have that κ´1    D        D
                         v ˚ mβ and mβ are equivalent (i.e. are in the same measure class)
if and only if
                                              ÿ
                      σ D pκ´1   D    D
                            v ˚ mβ , mβ q :“     σpmβpvdq , mβpdq q ă 8,
                                                   dPD

where
                                                                        ÿb
     σpmβpvdq , mβpdq q “ ´ logpρpmβpvdq , mβpdq qq “ ´ logp                  mβpvdq ptnuqmβpvdq ptnuqq.
                                                                        nPZ
                         GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                           45

                                                             ´n2 b{2                ř        ´k 2 b{2
Recall that mb P ProbpZq is defined as mb ptnuq “ e Zb where Zb “                       kPZ e         and
             b
that Zb „bÑ0 2π b
                  . Moreover, if a, b P p0, 1q, then we have that
                                                      ˜ ? ¸1{2
                                        Z a`b           2 ab
                       ρpma , mb q “ ? 2 „a,bÑ0                   .
                                         Za Zb           a`b
Since βpdq tends to zero when d tends to infinity we obtain that
                                                  ˜ a            ¸
                                             1      2 βpdqβpvdq
                    σpmβpvdq , mβpdq q „dÑ8 ´ log                  .
                                             2      βpdq ` βpvdq
Consider an element v P F satisfying vpxq “ x{2 for any x P p0, 1{2q and observe that
βp 21n q “ 2τ1n for any n ě 1. Therefore,
                                            8
                                            ÿ
                    σ D pκ´1   D    D
                          v ˚ mβ , mβ q ě         ´ logpρpmβp n`1
                                                               1
                                                                  q , mβp 1n q qq
                                                                2              2
                                            n“2
                                            ÿ8
                                        “         ´ logpρpm      1          1 qq
                                                                        , m nτ
                                                              2pn`1qτ      2
                                            n“2



Moreover, the term of this series is equivalent when n tends to infinity to
                      ˜ ?                 ¸          ˆ                ˙
                 1         2 2´p2n`1qτ           1            2
               ´ log                        “ ´ log                     ą 0.
                 2      2´nτ ` 2´pn`1qτ          2     2τ {2 ` 2´τ {2
This implies that the series diverges and thus the two measures κ´1   D      D
                                                                 v ˚ mβ and mβ are not
                                             D                    8   D   D
equivalent. Since the state ̟ restricts to mβ on the subalgebra L pZ , mβ q, we obtain
that the map αpvq defines as an automorphism of the C*-algebra M0 is not continuous
w.r.t. weak topology of M and thus does not extend in a normal way on it.           
A similar proof shows that any element v P V for which there exists an interval I such
that LebpvIq ‰ LebpIq defines a singular transformation κv w.r.t. the measure mβ with β
as above. Therefore, any elements that do not only permute intervals of same length act
in a singular way and fail to provide an automorphism of M .
3.3.1. Action of the rotations. Consider the rooted binary complete tree tn with 2n leaves
                                             ptn ,1q
all at distance n from the root. Let rn “ pt   n ,0q
                                                     be the element of T that permutes by one
the leaves of the tree tn . It corresponds to the rotation by angle 2´n when T acts on the
torus R{Z. Write Rotn the subgroup of T generated by rn that is isomorphic to the cyclic
            n                    2
group Z{2Ť Z and note that rn “ rn´1 implying that Rotn´1 is a subgroup of Rotn . Let
Rot :“ ně1 Rotn be the union of all those groups that is a subgroup of T and which is
                            n
isomorphic to lim
               ÝÑnPN Z{2 Z for the D   system of inclusions k ` 2n Z ÞÑ 2k ` 2n`1 Z.
We wonder if the action of Rot on Z is nonsingular for some choice of measure mD       β with
β : D Ñ Rą0 . This would provide actions of Rot on the von Neumann algebra M . We
will show that it is the case for a large class of β.
Consider the function ℓ : D Ñ R, d ÞÑ ´ log2 pd1 ´dq where pd, d1q is the largest s.d.i. start-
ing at d and log2 is the logarithm in base 2. For example, ℓp0q “ 0, ℓp1{2q “ 1, ℓp1{4q “
ℓp3{4q “ 2, etc.
46                   ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

Note that the s.d.p associated to tn is tp 2jn , j`1
                                                   2n
                                                      q : 0 ď j ď 2n ´ 1u. Hence, rn sends 2jn
to j`1
    2n
       . The next lemma concerns the value of ℓp 2jn q which will allow us to compare ℓp 2jn q
and ℓprp 2jn qq “ ℓp j`1
                      2n
                         q. The proof is a routine computation that is left to the reader.
Lemma 3.24. Consider the function ℓ : D Ñ R and the 2n -tuple
                                 Xn “ pℓpd1 q, ℓpd2 q, ¨ ¨ ¨ , ℓpd2n qq
where dj :“ j´1
             2n
                . Then Xn`1 is equal to
                         pℓpd1 q, n ` 1, ℓpd2q, n ` 1, ¨ ¨ ¨ , ℓpd2n q, n ` 1q.
This implies the following proposition.
Proposition 3.25. If n ě 1, d P D and ℓpdq ‰ ℓprn pdqq, then d “ 2jn for some j.
In particular, for any rotation r P Rot there exists only finitely many d P D for which
ℓpdq ‰ ℓprpdqq.
Proof. Consider n ě 1 and d P D. There exists k ě 0, 0 ď i ď 2n ´ 1 and 0 ď j ď
                                j
2k ´ 1 such that d “ 2in ` 2k`n    . Consider the tree tn`k that we write as the composition
tn`k “ ps1 b s2 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b s2n q ˝ tn where sm is a copy of tk for any 1 ď m ď 2n . Then d
corresponds to the j ` 1th leaf of the tree si`1 where we index the trees cyclicly in Z{2n Z.
Observe that rn pdq corresponds to the j ` 1th leaf of the tree si`2 . Let Yq “ py1q , ¨ ¨ ¨ , y2qk q
be the 2k -tuple such that ym q
                                  “ ℓpdm q and dm corresponds to the mth leaf of sq . Hence,
         i`1                      i`2                             ι
ℓpdq “ yj`1 and ℓprn pdqq “ yj`1      . Lemma 3.24 implies that ym  does not depend on ι if
m ‰ 1. Therefore, if ℓpdq ‰ ℓprn pdqq, then necessarily d is on the first leave of si`1 which
means that d “ 2an for some a ě 0. Consider any rotation r P Rot. There exists m ě 1
                           q
and q ě 0 such that r “ rm    . The first part of the proof shows that if ℓpdq ‰ ℓprpdqq, then
     p
d “ 2m for some p ě 0 and thus there are only finitely many such d P D.                           
This implies the following corollary about nonsingularity.
Corollary 3.26. Consider a map β : D Ñ Rą0 such that βpdq only depends on ℓpdq,
i.e. β “ b ˝ ℓ for some function b. Let mD β be the associated probability measure on Z
                                                                                         D

and consider the action of V ñ pZD , mD β q that we restrict to the rotation subgroup Rot.
                           D    D
Then the action Rot ñ pZ , mβ q is nonsingular and thus the restriction to Rot of the
Jones’ action Rot ñ M0 acting on the C*-algebra M0 extends to an action by automor-
phisms on the von Neumann algebra M .
More generally, the action Rot ñ pZD , bdPD νd q is nonsingular if pνd , d P Dq is any
family of probability measures that are all mutually equivalent and such that νd “ νd1 if
ℓpdq “ ℓpd1 q.
Remark 3.27. Although, it is natural to have an action of the rotation subgroup Rot Ă T
on our field algebra M , we expect that it is not possible to define the generator of rotations
as a strong limit,
                               s ´ lim 21n pUrn ´ 1qξ “ L0 ξ,
                                       nÑ8
as a consequence of gauge invariance, cp. Remark 2.8 and [42], see also [35, 16]. In
the conformal field theory interpretation of Proposition 2.12, L0 would be the conformal
Hamiltonian as opposed to the Kogut-Susskind Hamiltonian which motivates our defini-
tion of the heat-kernel states. L0 might exist on the level of observables, if we considered
the gauge invariant subsector of our model. But, in the case of YM1`1 this would result
in a topological theory without local degrees of freedom, see e.g. [22].
                           GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                        47

Example 3.21 provides such β and thus some examples of models M admitting the action
of the rotation subgroup Rot .
Remark 3.28. Most of the proofs provided in the special case of the circle group can be
adapted to the case of a general abelian group G and some measures md , d P D on its Pon-
tryagin dual. However, we do not have any general criteria for nonsingularity and ergod-
                                        p f r ñ pG
icity of the action. But, if the action G         pD , bdPD md q is nonsingular, then pM , ̟q is
isomorphic to the crossed-product von Neumann algebra L8 pG        pD , bdPD md q¸ G
                                                                                   p f r equipped
with the state given by the measure bdPD md that is thus faithful. If the action is ergodic
(which can be proved by showing that ‘D G      p belongs to the weak completion of G    pf r inside
AutpG pD , bdPD md q), then M is always a hyperfinite type III factor.

Acknowledgement. Part of this project was done when both authors were working at
the University of Rome, Tor Vergata thanks to the very generous support of Roberto
Longo. We are very grateful to Roberto for giving us this great opportunity besides his
constant encouragement and support during various stages of the project. AS thanks
the Alexander-von-Humboldt Foundation for generous financial support during his stay
at the University of Rome, Tor Vergata. Moreover, AS acknowledges financial support
and kind hospitality by the Isaac Newton Institute and the Banff International Research
Station where parts of this work were developed. Furthermore, we are grateful to Thomas
Thiemann, Yoh Tanimoto, Luca Giorgetti and Vincenzo Morinelli for comments and
discussions during various stages of this work. Finally, we are grateful to the referee for
constructive comments which improved the clarity of this manuscript.

                                           References
[1] F. Arici, R. Stienstra, and W. van Suijlekom. Quantum Lattice Gauge Fields and Groupoid C*-
 algebras. Annales Henri Poincaré, 19(11):3241–3266, 2018.
[2] W. B. Arveson. An Invitation to C*-Algebras, volume 39 of Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer-
 Verlag New York, 1st edition, 1976.
[3] A. Ashtekar and J. Lewandowski. Representation Theory of Analytic Holonomy C*-algebras. In J. C.
 Baez, editor, Knots and Quantum Gravity, pages 21–62. Oxford University Press, 1994.
[4] A. Ashtekar and J. Lewandowski. Differential geometry on the space of connections via graphs and
 projective limits. Journal of Geometry and Physics, 17(3):191–230, November 1995.
[5] A. Ashtekar and J. Lewandowski. Projective techniques and functional integration for gauge theories.
 Journal of Mathematical Physics, 36(5):2170–2191, May 1995.
[6] A. Ashtekar, J. Lewandowski, D. Marolf, J. M. C. Mourão, and T. Thiemann. Quantisation of dif-
 feomorphism invariant theories of connections with local degrees of freedom. Journal of Mathematical
 Physics, 36:6456–6493, 1995.
[7] A. Ashtekar, J. Lewandowski, D. Marolf, J. Mourão, and T. Thiemann. SU(N) Quantum Yang-Mills
 theory in two dimensions: A complete solution. Journal of Mathematical Physics, 38(11):5453–5482,
 1997.
[8] J. C. Baez. Spin Networks in Gauge Theory. Advances in Mathematics, 117:253–272, 1996.
[9] J. Belk. Thompson’s group F. PhD thesis, Cornell University, 2004.
[10] B. E. Blackadar. Operator Algebras: Theory of C*-Algebras and von Neumann Algebras, volume 122
 of Encyclopaedia of Mathematical Sciences. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2006.
[11] H.-J. Borchers. On revolutionizing quantum field theory with Tomita’s modular theory. Journal of
 Mathematical Physics, 41(6):3604–3673, 2000.
[12] O. Bratteli and D. W. Robinson. Operator Algebras and Quantum Statistical Mechanics 1: C ˚ -
 and W ˚ -Algebras, Symmetry Groups, Decomposition of States. Theoretical and Mathematical Physics.
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2nd edition, 1987.
48                    ARNAUD BROTHIER AND ALEXANDER STOTTMEISTER

[13] O. Bratteli and D. W. Robinson. Operator Algebras and Quantum Statistical Mechanics 2: Equilib-
 rium States, Models in Quantum Statistical Mechanics. Theoretical and Mathematical Physics. Springer-
 Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2nd edition, 1997.
[14] A. Brothier Haagerup property for wreath products constructed with Thompson’s groups. Preprint,
 arXiv:1906.03789, 2019.
[15] A. Brothier and V.F.R. Jones. On the Haagerup and Kazhdan property of R. Thompson’s groups.
 to appear in J. Funct. Anal., 2019.
[16] A. Brothier and V.F.R. Jones. Pythagorean representations of Thomspon’s groups. to appear in J.
 Group Theory, 2019.
[17] A. Brothier and A. Stottmeister. Canonical quantization of 1+1-dimensional yang-mills theory: an
 operator-algebraic approach. Preprint, arXiv:1907.05549, 2019.
[18] J. Cannon, W. Floyd, and W. Parry. Introductory notes on Richard Thompson’s groups. Enseign.
 Math., 42:215–256, 1996.
[19] J. R. Choksi and S. Kakutani. Residuality of ergodic measurable transformations and of ergodic
 transformations which preserve an infinite measure. Indiana University Mathematics Journal, 28(3):453–
 469, 1979.
[20] A. Connes. Noncommutative Geometry. Academic Press, San Diego, CA, 1st edition, 1994.
[21] M. Creutz. Quarks, Gluons and Lattices. Cambridge Monographs on Mathematical Physics. Cam-
 bridge University Press, 1985.
[22] J. Dimock. Canonical Quantization of Yang-Mills on a Circle. Reviews in Mathematical Physics,
 8:85–102, 1996.
[23] B. K. Driver and B. C. Hall. Yang-Mills Theory and the Segal-Bargmann transform. Communications
 in Mathematical Physics, 201(2):249–290, 1999.
[24] D. E. Evans and Y. Kawahigashi. Quantum Symmetries on Operator Algebras. Oxford University
 Press, page 848, 1998.
[25] G. Evenbly and G. Vidal. Tensor Network Renormalization. Physical Review Letters, 115(18):1–14,
 2015.
[26] G. Evenbly and G. Vidal. Tensor Network Renormalization Yields the Multiscale Entanglement
 Renormalization Ansatz. Physical Review Letters, 115, 2016.
[27] R. Fernández, J. Fröhlich, and A. D. Sokal. Random Walks, Critical Phenomena, and Triviality in
 Quantum Field Theory. Texts and Monographs in Physics. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 1992.
[28] F. Gabbiani and J. Fröhlich. Operator algebras and conformal field theory. Communications in
 Mathematical Physics, 155(3):569–640, 1993.
[29] H. Grundling. A group algebra for inductive limit groups. Continuity problems of the canonical
 commutation relations. Acta Appl. Math., 46:107–145, 1996.
[30] H. Grundling and G. Rudolph. QCD on an Infinite Lattice. Communications in Mathematical
 Physics, 318:717–766, 2013. H. Grundling, A group algebra for inductive limit groups. Continuity prob-
 lems of the canonical commutation relations, Acta Appl. Math. 46 (1997) 107145.
[31] H. Grundling and G. Rudolph. Dynamics for QCD on an Infinite Lattice. Communications in Math-
 ematical Physics, 349:1163–1202, 2016.
[32] R. Haag. Local Quantum Physics: Fields, Particles, Algebras. Theoretical and Mathematical Physics.
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2nd edition, 1996.
[33] J. Huebschmann, G. Rudolph and M. Schmidt. A gauge model for quantum mechanics on a stratified
 space Commun. Math Phys., 286:459-494, 2009.
[34] V.F.R. Jones. Some unitary representations of Tompson’s groups F and T. Journal of Combinatorial
 Algebra, 1(1):1–44, 2017.
[35] V.F.R. Jones. A No-Go Theorem for the Continuum Limit of a Periodic Quantum Spin Chain.
 Communications in Mathematical Physics, 357(1):295–317, 2018.
[36] V.F.R. Jones. Scale invariant transfer matrices and Hamiltonians. Journal of Physics A: Mathemat-
 ical and Theoretical, 51:104001, 2018.
[37] S. Kakutani. On Equivalence of Infinite Product Measures. Annals of Mathematics, 49(1):214–224,
 January 1948.
[38] J. B. Kogut. The lattice gauge theory approach to quantum chromodynamics. Reviews of Modern
 Physics, 55(3):775–836, July 1983.
                           GAUGE THEORY AND THOMPSON’S GROUPS                                         49

[39] J. B. Kogut and L. Susskind. Hamiltonian formulation of Wilson’s lattice gauge theories. Physical
 Review D: Particles and Fields, 11:395–408, January 1975.
[40] N. P. Landsman. Rieffel induction as generalized quantum Marsden-Weinstein reduction. J. Geom.
 Phys., 15: 285–319, 1995.
[41] T. Lang, K. Liegener, and T. Thiemann. Hamiltonian Renormalisation I: Derivation from
 Osterwalder-Schrader Reconstruction. Classical and Quantum Gravity, 35(24):245011, November 2017.
[42] J. Löffelholz, G. Morchio, and F. Strocchi. Mathematical structure of the temporal gauge in quantum
 electrodynamics. Journal of Mathematical Physics, 44:5095–5107, October 2003.
[43] A. Mal’tsev. Nilpotent semigroups. Uchen. Zap. Ivanovsk. Ped. Inst., 4:107–111, 1953.
[44] A. N. Sengupta. The Yang-Mills measure and symplectic structure over spaces of connections. In
 Quantization of Singular Symplectic Quotients, volume 198 of Progress in Mathematics, pages 329–355.
 Birkhäuser, Basel, 2001.
[45] A. Stottmeister and T. Thiemann. Coherent states, quantum gravity, and the Born- Oppenheimer
 approximation. II. Compact Lie groups. Journal of Mathematical Physics, 57:073501, July 2016.
[46] A. Stottmeister and T. Thiemann. Coherent states, quantum gravity, and the Born-Oppenheimer
 approximation. III.: Applications to loop quantum gravity. Journal of Mathematical Physics, 57:083509,
 August 2016.
[47] M. Takesaki. Theory of operator algebras. II, volume 125 of Encyclopaedia of Mathematical Sciences.
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2003. Operator Algebras and Non-commutative Geometry, 6.
[48] M. Takesaki. Theory of operator algebras. III, volume 127 of Encyclopaedia of Mathematical Sciences.
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2003. Operator Algebras and Non-commutative Geometry, 8.
[49] T. Thiemann. Modern Canonical Quantum General Relativity. Cambridge Monographs on Mathe-
 matical Physics. Cambridge University Press, 2007.
[50] T. Timmermann. An Invitation to Quantum Groups and Duality. EMS Textbooks in Mathematics.
 European Mathematical Society, 2008.
[51] J. M. Velhinho. Functorial Aspects of the Space of Generalized Connections. Modern Physics Letters
 A, 20(17-18):1299–1303, June 2005.
[52] G. Vidal. A Class of Quantum Many-Body States That Can Be Efficiently Simulated. Physical
 Review Letters, 101(11):110501, September 2008.
[53] K. G. Wilson. Renormalization Group and Critical Phenomena. I. Renormalization Group and the
 Kadanoff Scaling Picture. Physical Review B: Condensed Matter and Materials Physics, 4(9):3174–3183,
 November 1971.
[54] K. G. Wilson. Renormalization Group and Critical Phenomena. II. Phase-Space Cell Analysis of Crit-
 ical Behavior. Physical Review B: Condensed Matter and Materials Physics, 4(9):3184–3205, November
 1971.
[55] E. Witten. On quantum gauge theories in two dimensions. Communications in Mathematical Physics,
 141(1):153–209, October 1991.
[56] K.K. Wren. Quantization of constrained systems with singularities using Rieffel induction. J. Geom.
 Phys., 24:173-202, 1998.

Arnaud Brothier, School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of New South Wales,
Sydney NSW 2052, Australia, Tel.: +612 9385 7077
E-mail address: arnaud.brothier@gmail.com
https://sites.google.com/site/arnaudbrothier/

Alexander Stottmeister, Department of Mathematics, University of Rome Tor Vergata,
Via della Ricerca Scientifica 00133 Roma, Italy
E-mail address: alexander.stottmeister@gmail.com
