                                             CONFORMAL FIELD THEORY AT THE LATTICE LEVEL:
                                          DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE

                                                     CLÉMENT HONGLER, KALLE KYTÖLÄ, AND FREDRIK VIKLUND


                                          Abstract. Critical statistical mechanics and Conformal Field Theory (CFT) are conjecturally
                                          connected since the seminal work of Beliavin, Polyakov, and Zamolodchikov [BPZ84a]. Both
                                          exhibit exactly solvable structures in two dimensions. A long-standing question [ItTh87] concerns
                                          whether there is a direct link between these structures, that is, whether the Virasoro algebra
arXiv:1307.4104v3 [math-ph] 20 Jun 2019




                                          representations of CFT, the distinctive feature of CFT in two dimensions, can be found within
                                          lattice models of statistical mechanics. We give a positive answer to this question for the discrete
                                          Gaussian free field and for the Ising model, by connecting the structures of discrete complex
                                          analysis in the lattice models with the Virasoro symmetry that is expected to describe their
                                          scaling limits.
                                              This allows for a tight connection of a number of objects from the lattice model world and
                                          the field theory one. In particular, our results link the CFT local fields with lattice local fields
                                          introduced in [GHP19] and the probabilistic formulation of the lattice model with the continuum
                                          correlation functions. Our construction is a decisive step towards establishing the conjectured
                                          correspondence between the correlation functions of the CFT fields and those of the lattice local
                                          fields.
                                              In particular, together with the upcoming [CHI19], our construction will complete the picture
                                          initiated in [HoSm13, Hon12, CHI15], where a number of conjectures relating specific Ising lattice
                                          fields and CFT correlations were proven.




                                                                                           1
               DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE    2

                                     Contents
1. Introduction                                                    3
1.1. Statistical Mechanics and Conformal Field Theory              3
1.2. Exact Solvability                                             3
1.3. Lattice Models                                                4
1.4. Conformal Field Theory and Virasoro Algebra                   4
1.5. Strategy                                                      6
1.6. Main Result and Applications                                  7
1.7. Organization of the Paper                                     9
1.8. Acknowledgements                                             10
2. Discrete Complex Analysis                                      10
2.1. Lattices and Discrete Domains                                10
2.2. Discrete Differential Operators                              11
2.3. Discrete Integration                                         12
2.4. Discrete Integer Monomials                                   12
2.5. Discrete Half-Integer Monomials                              13
3. Gaussian free field and Ising Model                            15
3.1. Lattice Models and Field Theory                              15
3.2. Discrete Gaussian Free Field                                 16
3.3. Ising Model                                                  17
4. Virasoro Algebra at the Lattice Level                          25
4.1. Gaussian free field                                          25
4.2. Ising Model                                                  30
5. Discrete Complex Analysis Proofs                               37
5.1. Integer Monomial Construction                                37
5.2. Construction of Discrete Square Roots                        38
5.3. Half-Integer Powers                                          42
5.4. Contour Integrals                                            42
5.5. Proof of Propositions 2.1 and 2.3                            45
6. Lattice Fermion Proofs                                         45
6.1. Fermions as Parafermions                                     45
6.2. Discrete Holomorphicity                                      46
References                                                        52
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                               3

                                        1. Introduction

1.1. Statistical Mechanics and Conformal Field Theory. Physical arguments suggest that
2D lattice models at continuous phase transitions have conformally invariant scaling limits that
can be described by Conformal Field Theories (CFTs). The 2D CFTs are exactly solvable in
the sense that they can be studied in terms of representations of the Virasoro algebra. This has
led to exact formulae for the (conjectural) scaling limits of correlations, partition functions, and
critical exponents of such lattice models. See, e.g., [BPZ84a, BPZ84b, DMS97, Mus09] and the
references in the latter.
Despite the success of the application of CFT to lattice models, it usually constitutes a non-
rigorous approach to statistical mechanics. Indeed, one needs to assume that the fields of the
models have conformally invariant scaling limits and that they can be described within the
framework of certain quantum field theories.
In the special case of the (discrete) Gaussian free field, the CFT approach can carried out rigor-
ously and Virasoro representations can be found in the continuum in terms of insertions [Gaw99,
KaMa11]. For the Ising model, significant progress towards connecting its correlations with the
correlation of the relevant CFTs has been made recently [CHI15, Hon10, HoSm13].
Schramm’s SLEs provide a different route towards a rigorous understanding of conformally
invariant scaling limits [Sch00, Sch07]. These random curves describe the scaling limits of cluster
interfaces in the lattice models. Moreover, SLE processes are amenable to calculations and SLE
techniques have been successfully applied to produce interpretations and rigorous proofs of a
number of the conjectures of CFT, see, e.g., the references in [KaMa11]. Studies of more direct
and systematic connections between SLE and CFT have been carried out, leading to beautiful
results. See, e.g., [BaBe03, DRV06, FrWe03, KaMa11, Kyt07, Dub15b, Dub15c, FlKl15].
Still, the connection between lattice models and CFT remains far from well-understood and,
it seems fair to say, rather mysterious from a mathematical perspective. Thus it appears of
significant interest to advance the mathematical understanding of CFT applied to lattice models.
There are many fundamental difficulties, including in particular the correspondence between
discrete and continuous quantities, the proofs of conformal invariance, the locality of the limits,
and the positivity of the underlying representations, to name a few.

1.2. Exact Solvability. In two dimensions, a number of lattice models (see Section 1.3 below)
are considered exactly solvable in a different sense than CFTs. Typically, exact solvability in this
context means that certain lattice-level relations such as the Yang-Baxter equations are present
and this often yields exact formulae for a number of interesting quantities of the models. In fact,
this is how most of the exact results about lattice models were derived in the 20th century. See,
e.g., [Bax89] and references therein.
Recently, discrete solvability has been formulated in terms of discrete holomorphicity. This has
enabled the use of discrete complex analysis techniques leading to rigorous proofs of conformal
invariance for a number of exactly solvable lattice models and to exact formulae for their limiting
correlations, matching the predictions of the relevant CFTs. See, e.g., [Ken00, Ken01, Smi06,
Smi10a, CHI15].
Once the lattice solvability has been used to establish conformal invariance, the latter should in
principle help reveal the algebraic structures of CFT. Thus it is natural to expect lattice and
CFT solvability to be (indirectly) connected via continuous conformally invariant objects such
as SLE or the GFF or by the identification of lattice precursors of key CFT objects, see, e.g.,
[BeHo17, Dub15a, Dub11b, Dub15c, CGS16] for recent progress in this direction.
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                 4

This leads to the following natural question formulated already in the late 1980s [ItTh87]:
     • Is there a direct connection between exact solvability of lattice models and of conformal
       field theories?
In this paper we resolve this longstanding problem in the positive for the discrete Gaussian free
field and the critical Ising model: the central algebraic structures of the CFTs describing their
scaling limits are in fact already present at the lattice level.
This question has been investigated in the physics literature in the case of the 8-vertex model
and the Ising model, see [ItTh87, KoSa94] and the references in the latter, as well as the re-
cent development [GJRSV13]. However, our results are the first where the relevant lattice and
continuous structures are directly and exactly connected (without deformation). Moreover, the
action of the operators takes place on a space of lattice ancestors of the local fields, thus giving a
transparent, probabilistic interpretation of the situation, and is formulated in terms of discrete
complex analysis, enabling control of the limits.

1.3. Lattice Models. A lattice model is informally a probabilistic or quantum model which
“lives” on a graph or lattice such as Z2 : there are (random or quantum) degrees of freedom
associated with each vertex, edge, or face of the lattice. Of particular interest are the large-scale
features of such models, particularly when they result in randomness at large scale suggesting
the existence of scaling limits, i.e., macroscopic random objects which describe the models as
one “looks at them from far away.”
This paper focuses on two classical probabilistic lattice models: the discrete Gaussian free field
(defined precisely in Section 3.2) and the Ising model (defined precisely in Section 3.3), both with
one degree of freedom associated with each vertex. Their scaling limits are the most fundamental
examples of CFTs.

1.3.1. Discrete Gaussian free field. The discrete Gaussian free field (dGFF) on a graph G is a
random Gaussian vectorP(ϕx ) with entries   indexed by the vertices x of G with density propor-
                                         2
tional to exp − const. x∼y (ϕx − ϕy ) where the sum is over all pairs of adjacent vertices;
see Section 3.2 for the precise conventions that we will use.
By taking an appropriate scaling limit of the dGFF, one recovers the Gaussian free field (also
known as the massless free boson field) which plays a central rôle in Quantum Field Theory. The
continuum GFF is well-understood mathematically, see, e.g., [Gaw99, GJ87, KaMa11, She07].

1.3.2. Ising Model. The Ising model is perhaps the most well-studied model of equilibrium sta-
tistical mechanics. It consists of random ±1-valued spins (σx ) living on the vertices      x of a
graph G. The probability
                   P        of a spin configuration  is proportional to exp − β  H[σ]  , where  the
energy H[σ] = − x∼y σx σy is obtained by summing over all pairs of adjacent vertices and β > 0
is called the inverse temperature. The large-scale behavior of the model depends strongly on β: if
                                                   2
we consider the Ising√ model
                            on a large subset of Z , a long range alignment will occur if and only
                1
if β > βcr. := 2 ln 2 + 1 , while the system will look disordered at large scale for β < βcr. . The
critical regime β = βcr. has been the object of much attention in the last decades: in particular,
one of the motivations for the study of CFT is to describe the scaling limit of this model.

1.4. Conformal Field Theory and Virasoro Algebra. In this subsection we briefly outline
a number key ideas of CFT, in particular the Virasoro algebra.
                     DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                        5

1.4.1. Statistical Field Theory. A (physical) theory aimed at describing a random system with
infinitely many degrees of freedom is often called a statistical field theory. Of particular interest
are the (conjectural) scaling limits of lattice models, i.e., the limits of lattice models living on δ-
meshed discretizations Ωδ of continuous domains Ω ⊂ Rn , as δ → 0. It is expected, but unproven
except in a few cases, that most lattice models with an infinite correlation length converge to
non-trivial scaling limits that can be described by statistical field theories.
A statistical field theory on Ω ⊂ Rn is usually thought of as a random process φ with a mea-
sure P {φ} ∝ exp − S [φ] , where S is a functional called the action. The main objects of
interest are the correlations of local fields Oj , roughly speaking functions of φ in an infinites-
imal neighborhood of their point of insertion, for example derivatives of φ. The correlations
  O1 (z1 ) · · · On (zn ) Ω are thought of as functional integrals
                                    ´
                                      O1 (z1 ) [φ] · · · On (zn ) [φ] e−S[φ] Dφ
(1.1)                                             ´                             ,
                                                      e−S[φ] Dφ
over all the possible realizations of the field φ defined on Ω. This is natural, e.g., by analogy
with the definition of lattice models such as the dGFF and the Ising model.
Unfortunately, all of the above is difficult to make precise. Instead, a common approach is to
define local fields as being objects one can take (abstract) correlations of. One hence considers
a space F of local fields, equipped with multilinear operations
                          F n 3 (O1 , . . . , On ) 7→ O1 (z1 ) · · · On (zn ) Ω ∈ C,
defined for distinct points z1 , . . . , zn ∈ Ω. A number of axioms are then added corresponding to
what the abstract correlations are expected to satisfy (positivity, etc.), were they to arise from
functional integrals as in (1.1). This is one of the standard approaches to CFT [Seg88, Seg04].
One of the eventual outcomes of this paper is an alternative route to understanding (at least)
certain field theories, which restores part of this probabilistic picture, and brings the original
spirit of functional integrals much closer.

1.4.2. Conformal Field Theory. A Euclidean Conformal Field Theory on Ω ⊂ C is informally a
statistical field theory with conformal symmetry. Conformal symmetry is thought of as a sym-
metry of the action functional S. Conformal symmetry can then be defined by postulating the
existence of a special local field T , called the holomorphic Stress-Energy Tensor 1. Its correlations
                                                          Y
                                   Ω \ {zj } 3 z 7→ T (z)     Oj (zj )
                                                              j

are holomorphic and have prescribed poles as z → zj .
The poles of T (z)T (w) as z → w are in particular given by the so-called Conformal Ward
Identity 2
                                            c/2      2T (w)     ∂T (w)
(1.2)                    T (z)T (w) =           4 +         2 +        + reg,
                                         (z − w)    (z − w)     z−w
where the number c ∈ R is an important parameter, characteristic of the CFT in question, and
is called its central charge.
  1In the functional integral picture, T is defined via the variation of the action with respect to a change of
metric; informally the insertion of T hence represents a change of measure (Ã la Radon-Nikodym derivatives)
corresponding to an infinitesimal change of metric.
   2Again, this should be interpreted within correlations only.
                      DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                      6

1.4.3. Virasoro Algebra. A key insight of 2D field theory is that the modes of the stress-energy
tensor T can act as operators on other local fields: for each n ∈ Z and O ∈ F, one defines a
field3 Ln O ∈ F by
                                        ˛
(1.3)                   Ln O(z) := lim          T (ζ)O(z) (ζ − z)n+1 dζ.
                                        →0+    |ζ−z|=

From (1.2), the operators (Ln )n∈Z can then be shown to form a representation of the Virasoro
algebra of central charge c, i.e., their commutation relations are
                                                         c
                                                            n3 − n δn,−m .
                                                                   
(1.4)                     [Ln , Lm ] = (n − m) Ln+m +
                                                        12
The Virasoro algebra is the cornerstone for the algebraic exact solution of CFT: the Ln operators
can be studied in terms of Virasoro representation theory; further down this road, by their
definition in terms of T , the Ln ’s yield precise geometric information about the correlations
which, e.g., can be cast as linear partial differential equations for correlation functions.

1.4.4. Vertex Operator Algebras and Sugawara Construction. The key feature that enables the
construction of linear operators on the space of local fields is the holomorphicity of the stress
tensor (and it is the geometric importance of the latter which then allows one to derive results
about correlations). Large classes of CFTs possess a number of holomorphic fields besides the
stress energy tensor and its descendants (the Virasoro subrepresentation generated by T ). These
CFTs, whose algebraic axiomatization is Vertex Operator Algebras (VOAs), are the object of
many beautiful insights of mathematical physics, representation theory, and string theory (see
[Bor86, FLM88, Kac82]).
The CFTs of the GFF and the Ising model both possess a VOA structure, based on the current
field (for the GFF) and the fermion field (for the Ising CFT) respectively. The modes of these
holomorphic fields and their commutation relations can be studied in a fashion that is similar
to the way the modes of the stress-tensor are studied. Furthermore, the stress tensor of these
theories can be constructed in terms of the currents and fermions, and as result, the modes of
the stress tensor can be constructed in terms of the modes of the current and fermion, through
what is known as the Sugawara-Sommerfield construction [Sug68, Som68]. The main result of
this paper relies crucially on this construction.

1.5. Strategy. The approach suggested in [GHP19] and in the present paper is quite different
from the usual axiomatic approach to CFT: we look at lattice models as precursors of the field
theories. The (often ill-defined) process φ : Ω → R is replaced by a random function φδ : Ωδ → R,
where Ωδ is a discretization of Ω. The functional integral formalism is then perfectly well defined.
Indeed, the lattice analogues of local fields Oδ are defined as functions of values of the process φδ
on finitely many neighbors of the insertions, and correlation functions are just expected values.
The obvious drawback is that lattice models have no conformal symmetry: indeed, such models
are not invariant under scaling or (most) rotations, let alone more general conformal mappings.
Nevertheless, some lattice models, such as the dGFF and the Ising model, possess a number of
discrete holomorphic fields, i.e., fields whose correlations satisfy lattice analogues of the Cauchy-
Riemann equations. If we could find a suitable lattice ancestor of T — a discrete holomorphic
lattice local field satisfying a discrete version of the Conformal Ward Identity (1.2) — we might
hope to be able to realize the Virasoro algebra at the lattice level.
  3Since a field is merely an object one can take correlations of, this indeed defines a field.Also, since the
correlations of T (z) are holomorphic, one can just take  small enough. (But how small  needs to be depends
on the locations of the other inserted fields in the correlation.)
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                 7

However, the discrete holomorphic fields of the dGFF and the Ising Model are not lattice an-
cestors of the stress tensor, but of (in some sense) more primitive objects; the current and the
fermion, respectively. Since discrete holomorphicity is a rather fragile property (for instance, it
is not even preserved by squaring), it is not obvious how to construct more sophisticated discrete
holomorphic fields from them.
The approach of this paper relies on revealing, at the lattice level, the extended Vertex Operator
Algebra structure that both models carry, which involves the current and fermion modes. The
Virasoro generators can then be constructed on relevant lattice local field spaces as bilinear prod-
ucts of these modes, through the Sugawara construction. Remarkably, the whole construction
can be carried out at the lattice level, yielding the same exact commutation relations as in the
scaling limit, while acting on probabilistically transparent objects.

1.6. Main Result and Applications. As explained in Section 1.4, the Virasoro algebra in
CFT acts on a space of local fields. In this paper, we consider the lattice analogue of local fields
proposed in [GHP19], and we define relevant operators on that space, allowing for a construction
of the full Virasoro symmetry on it.

1.6.1. Lattice Local Fields. A lattice local field is a natural generalization of fields of the form
x 7→ ϕx , x 7→ ϕ2x , x 7→ σx σx+δ , x 7→ σx+δ − σx , etc., namely a translation-invariant functional
that depends on a finite number of variables applied to the dGFF and Ising basic fields ϕx
and σx . See Definition 3.3 in Section 3.1 for a more precise definition. We call a lattice local
field null if its correlations against other lattice local fields (taken at large enough distance) are
zero. Note that null fields are not necessarily zero in a given realization, for example the discrete
Laplacian of the dGFF has vanishing correlations. The connection between lattice local fields
and CFT local fields (which can serve as a probabilistic definition of the latter, since none has
been given) has been conjectured in, e.g., [GHP19].

1.6.2. Main Result. Let FG denote the space of lattice local fields of the dGFF, modulo its null
fields, and let FI denote the space of lattice local fields of the critical Ising model, modulo its
null fields.
Our main theorem can then be informally phrased as follows.
Theorem. The Sugawara constructions of the Virasoro modes of the dGFF and of the critical
Ising model can be naturally and exactly realized at the lattice level on the space FG and FI
respectively, by considering discrete complex Laurent modes of the lattice current and lattice
fermion, respectively.

The precise form of the theorem, as well as its proof, is given in Section 4, in the form of Theorem
4.10 (dGFF case) and Theorem 4.24 (Ising case).
By the link between the discrete and continuous structures that it establishes, our main theorem
yields an improved understanding of both:
     • On the one hand, the construction demonstrates how the lattice solvability can be directly
       expressed in terms of the algebraic structures of CFT. This gives a convincing answer to
       the classical question of their connection [ItTh87] and opens the possibility to understand
       more structures related to Vertex Operator Algebras in a similar manner.
     • On the other hand, by giving a natural lattice construction of the objects of CFT, it
       gives the possibility of understanding CFTs in probabilistic terms. As mentioned in
       Section 1.5, this can be achieved by finding the proper (manifestly probabilistic) discrete
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                8

       analogues of the field-theoretic concepts, and (later) establishing their convergence in the
       scaling limit.
These two directions, and some applications, are detailed in the next two paragraphs.
1.6.3. Application: Algebraic Structures. The study of the CFTs in terms of their Vertex Oper-
ator Algebra structures is a major branch of CFT [FLM88], which has ramifications in string
theory, condensed matter physics, and representation theory. Most of the mathematical works
on such theories rely on a formal and abstract axiomatic construction of field theories, and as
such often appear daunting. It now appears that a significant part of the relevant structures can
be constructed very concretely at the lattice level, using the techniques introduced in this paper,
thus significantly facilitating the understanding of these structures. While these developments
will be studied in a subsequent paper, we briefly outline two particular (related) constructions
of CFT, which appear to be amenable to lattice constructions such as the ones proposed in this
paper: the Coulomb gas formalism and the Affine Kac-Moody algebra CFTs. The main idea
that emerges is: many of the important algebraic structures of CFT can emerge from lattice
solvability phrased as discrete holomorphicity.
The so-called Dotsenko-Fateev Coulomb gas construction is a fundamental idea of CFT [DoFa84,
Fel89, DMS97], which informally relies on considering complex exponentials of the GFF. Within
this framework it is possible to vary the central charge of the theory, and thus to construct
explicitly a large number of CFTs modeled on a Gaussian structure. The constructions of the
Coulomb gas theory can be phrased in terms of deformations of the Sugawara construction (see,
e.g., [Fel89, KaMa11, Mic89]). Using a modified version of our dGFF construction (corresponding
to other central charges) it is possible to reveal them exactly at the lattice level. This will allow
for constructions of lattice precursors of a number of objects of central importance in CFT,
which moreover appear connected to other lattice models, such as dimers.
A number of important examples of CFTs are those endowed with extensions of the Virasoro
algebra symmetry called Affine Kac-Moody (AKM) algebras. These have found applications
in condensed matter physics and in string theory, and are at the heart of coset field theories,
which are among the most general classes of CFTs (in particular, coset CFTs include all the
minimal models). The most basic example of AKM CFT is the Gaussian free field, which is
endowed with its Heisenberg current algebra, which is precisely the structure that we reveal at the
discrete level. Thanks to the so-called Wakimoto construction, AKM CFTs can be constructed
by taking several independent copies of the GFF, through a scheme similar to that of the
Coulomb Gas construction. Further down this road, a number of constructions involving several
copies of the Ising fermions, in particular the theory of the framed Vertex Operator Algebras,
have recently yielded important results in representation theory of finite groups [Miy04], and it
appears that realizing them on the lattice level would give new insights and allow for a number
of simplifications.
1.6.4. Application: Probabilistic Field Theories. The other promising line of research emerging
from this paper is the possibility to give clear and precise probabilistic meaning to CFT objects,
thus enabling one to restore the “original” point of view of such theories in terms of functional
integrals. While discretizing quantum field theories as a way to regularize them is an old idea,
promoted in particular by Kenneth Wilson [Car13, WiKo74] and now viewed as the best way to
mathematically understand them, the following is new: the possibility to identify transparentely
the operator content of CFTs such as the one describing the Ising model, at the lattice level.
Relatedly, a dual point of view, looking at the correlations as linear functionals on the space of
fields, allows one to bridge the classical thermodynamical point of view of statistical mechanics,
                      DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                             9

in terms of Gibbs measures, with the point of view of CFT correlations, hence allowing one to
view the Virasoro algebra as an action on space of measures. The main idea that emerges is:
the whole operator content and algebraic structure of certain CFTs can be explicitly constructed
at the lattice level, and hence given a probabilistic meaning.
The dual point of view of realizing
                                 Q the Virasoro algebra consists in looking at correlation function-
als µ defined by O 7→ O(0) Oj (zj ) Ω , defined for any data of a domain Ω, boundary condi-
tions, with insertions Oj (zj ) at zj 6= 0, and in defining an adjoint (contragredient) action on such
functionals, by defining L†n µ (O) := µ (L−n O). Our main result yields a lattice analogue of this,
as follows. Consider a sequence of discrete domains (Ωδk )k with mesh sizes δk = 1/k, together
with boundary conditions and insertions of lattice local fields Ojδk (zj ) at points zj 6= 0. We can
                                                                                  h        Q δk      i
                                                                         δ           δk
then form the sequence of correlation functionals (µk )k defined by O 7→ EΩδk O (0) Oj (zj )
(for each  Oδ , µk Oδ is defined for large enough k). The dual action gives rise to the sequence
   †           †
                                       
 Ln µk k by Ln µk (O ) := µk L−n O , where L−n Oδ is the Virasoro action on the lattice local field
                      δ               δ

Oδ (for each Oδ and n ∈ Z, this is defined for large enough k). This is a natural generalization
of the Gibbs measure, where instead of just looking at the (unnormalized) limits of µk as k → ∞
(which is the definition of a Gibbs measure), one looks at the entire sequence itself (or more
precisely, its tail)4. This point of view naturally bridges the Gibbs measure picture with the one
of CFT.5
In [GHP19], a conjecture linked the local field picture of the Ising model with the operator
content of the corresponding CFT: each lattice local field is conjectured to converge, with some
proper normalization, to a CFT local field, and all CFT local fields can be obtained as such
limits. The second part of this conjecture is particularly interesting as it allows one to give a
probabilistic meaning to the operator content of the CFTs. This seems in particular to make
sense of the operator content of the massive field theories emerging from perturbed CFTs (e.g.
the one describing the critical Ising model with an infinitesimal magnetic field), where the
axiomatic formalism breaks down. Our main result is a key step for establishing this second
part: the operator content of the Ising CFT consists of descendants of three primary fields (the
identity, the spin and the energy). Since the correlations of these fields have been established to
converge to their continuous counterparts (the identity is trivial, see [CHI15] for the spin and
[Hon10] for the energy), it remains to prove that the lattice descendants, as constructed by our
main result, indeed converge.
In a subsequent paper, this will be proven, by combining the results of the present paper with the
upcoming paper [CHI19], where it is proven that multipoint correlations of spins, energies and
fermions, taken at far apart points, converge. A deformation of the discrete contour integrals
appearing in the present paper will indeed allow one to reduce the correlations of any lattice
descendant field, to those of the spin, energy and fermions and hence yield the result.

1.7. Organization of the Paper. In Section 2, we introduce the discrete complex analytic
tools we need, in particular discrete holomorphic functions, discrete contours integrals, lattice
integer and half-integer monomials. The proofs of the statements of this section are postponed
to Section 5.

  4The idea is that various limits will be of interest, which might involve renormalizing by certain powers of δ
                                                                                                                   k
(depending on Oδ in particular) as k → ∞.
   5
    This is also the point of view which was chosen as the primary point of view in an earlier version of the
present paper.
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                10

In Section 3, we introduce the relevant objects for the lattice models that we consider, in partic-
ular the lattice local fields, the discrete Gaussian free field current and the Ising fermion. The
technical proofs of this section, pertaining to the Ising fermion, are postponed to Section 6.
In Section 4, we combine the objects and results of Sections 2 and 3 to define the Virasoro
algebra actions, and hence prove the main theorem.

1.8. Acknowledgements. CH acknowledges support from the ERC SG CONSTAMIS grant,
the NCCR SwissMAP grant, the NSF DMS-1106588 grant, the Minerva Foundation, the Blavat-
nik Family Foundation. FJV acknowledges support from the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foun-
dation, the Swedish Research Council, the Gustafsson Foundation, the Simons foundation, and
the NSF grant DMS-1308476. KK is supported by the Academy of Finland.
We would like to thank Gérard Ben Arous, Stéphane Benoist, Richard Borcherds, Paul Bour-
gade, John Cardy, Dmitry Chelkak, Gesualdo Delfino, Julien Dubédat, Hugo Duminil-Copin,
Christophe Garban, Krzysztof Gawȩdzki, Jan de Gier, Alexander Glazman, Reza Gheissari,
Alessandro Giuliani, Konstantin Izyurov, Igor Krichever, Antti Kupiainen, Vieiri Mastropietro,
Michael McBreene, Jouko Mickelsson, Bertrand Nienhuis, Andrei Okounkov, Eveliina Peltola,
Sungchul Park, Duong H. Phong, Stanislav Smirnov, Thomas Spencer, Valerio Toledano Laredo,
Fabio Toninelli, and Wendelin Werner for interesting discussions.
CH would also like to thank the late Pierluigi Falco, for many good and inspiring discussions.

                               2. Discrete Complex Analysis

In two dimensions, conformal symmetry is deeply linked to complex analysis. On the lattice
level, the combinatorial structures of the models we consider in this paper are linked with
discrete complex analysis and this is what has allowed for proofs of conformal invariance of their
scaling limits.

2.1. Lattices and Discrete Domains. We will work with a number of lattices associated with
the square lattice δZ2 of mesh size δ, and in particular use the following (see Figure 2.1):
     • Let (Cδ , Eδ ) denote the discrete complex plane, i.e., the graph δZ2 .
     • Let (C∗δ , Eδ∗ ) be the dual of δZ2 .
     • Let (Cδ , Eδ ) be the diamond graph whose
                                              √     vertices are Cδ ∪C∗δ and with an edge connecting
       each pair of vertices at distance δ/ 2.
                                                                 2
     • Let (Cm       m
               δ , Eδ ) be the medial lattice with respect to δZ , with a vertex for each edge of Eδ ;
       two medial vertices are adjacent if the corresponding edges share an endpoint.
     • Let (Ccδ , Eδc ) denote the bi-medial lattice (corner lattice): each vertex of the bi-medial
       lattice is called a corner. A corner lies between a vertex and a dual vertex, and two
       corners are adjacent if they are at distance 2δ from each other. An edge e ∈ Eδc of the
       bi-medial lattice lies between a vertex of the diamond lattice and a vertex of the medial
       lattice, denoted e and em .
Adjacency is denoted by ∼ on any of the above graphs: we denote v ∼ w if vertices v and w
are the two endpoints of an edge. Moreover, for two points of different lattices, we still use the
symbol ∼ to denote that the pair of points are nearest neighbors — e.g., for z ∈ Cδ , ζ ∈ Cmδ we
have z ∼ ζ if and only if |z − ζ| = 2δ .
Occasionally we work simultaneously with two of the above lattices, and for this purpose we use
                                         
the shorthand notations Cm        m           cm     c    m
                            δ := Cδ ∪ Cδ and Cδ := Cδ ∪ Cδ .
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                   11




                                                                                                 Cδ

                                                                                                 C∗δ


                                   (a) Square lattice Cδ and its dual C∗δ .




                                           Cm
                                            δ                                                    Ccδ

                 (b) Medial lattice Cm
                                     δ .                              (c) Corner lattice Ccδ .

                             Figure 2.1. Illustrations of the lattices.

2.2. Discrete Differential Operators. Below, we introduce the lattice analogues of differ-
ential operators that we use. The coefficients of these finite difference operators ∂δ , ∂¯δ , ∆δ are
illustrated also in Figure 2.2. Throughout the paper, whenever needed, we will extend functions
f defined on subsets (subgraphs) Ωδ of Cδ by setting f |Cδ \Ωδ ≡ 0, and similarly for functions
defined on subgraphs Ωm         m
                         δ of Cδ .

     • For f : Cδ → C, we define discrete Wirtinger derivatives ∂δ f, ∂¯δ f : Cm
                                                                                δ → C by
                                                                                   
                          1        δ         δ     i          iδ              iδ 
              ∂δ f (z) =      f z+     −f z−       −     f z+        −f z−
                          2        2          2      2           2                2
                                                                                   
                          1        δ          δ      i          iδ              iδ 
              ∂¯δ f (z) =
                                               
                              f z+     −f z−       +     f z+        −f z−
                          2        2          2      2          2                2
       and for f : Cm                      ¯       
                    δ → C, we define ∂δ f, ∂δ f : Cδ → C by the same formulae.
     • We define the discrete Laplacian as ∆δ = 4 ∂δ ∂¯δ = 4 ∂¯δ ∂δ , so that for f : Cδ → C we have
       ∆δ f : Cδ → C given by
                                          X                          
                             ∆δ f (z) =           f z + x − 4f z
                                            x∈{±δ,±iδ}

       and similarly for f : Cmδ → C.
     • A function f from Cδ or Cm   δ to C is said to be discrete holomorphic (on a region of Cδ )
          ¯
       if ∂δ f = 0 (on that region of Cδ ). If f is discrete holomorphic, then it can be locally
       integrated, i.e., there exists F (at least locally defined) such that ∂δ F = f .
Note that we are not scaling the right-hand sides, so the continuum differential operators are
approximated as δ → 0 by, e.g., δ −1 ∂δ → ∂ and δ −2 ∆δ → ∆.
                      DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                               12


                                                                                        +1

                                −i                         +i
                                2                          2
                                                                       ∆δ :   +1        −4      +1
               ∂δ :    −1
                        2
                                     +1
                                     2      ∂¯δ :    −1
                                                      2
                                                                  +1
                                                                  2
                                +i                         −i
                                2                          2
                                                                                        +1
              (a) Discrete Wirtinger       (b) Discrete Wirtinger      (c) Discrete Laplacian ∆δ .
              derivative ∂δ .              derivative ∂¯δ .

                                Figure 2.2. Discrete differential operators.

2.3. Discrete Integration. In the lattice setting, we will need to integrate products of two
functions over discrete contours. By a discrete contour, we mean be an oriented path γ of edges
                                                                                        
on the corner lattice Ccδ , see Figure 2.3. For two functions f : Cm     δ → C and g : Cδ → C, we then
define the discrete contour integral of f times g along γ by
                         “
                                                     1X                ~e+ − ~e−
                              f (zm )g(z ) [dz]δ :=    f (em )g(e )              ,
                            γ                        2                |~e+ − ~e− |
                                                           ~e∈γ

where the sum is over all oriented edges ~e = (~e− , ~e+ ) of γ, and where em and e denote the medial
and diamond vertices separated by ~e›. Note that the continuum   ¸     contour integral approximation
as δ → 0 again requires a scaling, δ γ f (zm )g(z ) [dz]δ → f (z)g(z) dz.
If the discrete contour γ is closed, we denote by Int[γ] the interior of γ, i.e., the set of points
surrounded by γ. For closed counterclockwise discrete contours γ, we have the following discrete
Stokes-like formula
             “                          X                           X
(2.1)           f (zm )g(z ) [dz]δ = i       f (wm )∂¯δ g(wm ) + i         ∂¯δ f (w )g(w ).
              γ                           wm ∈Cm                              w ∈Cδ ∩Int[γ]
                                               δ ∩Int[γ]


In particular, if both f and g are discrete holomorphic in the symmetric difference Int[γ] ⊕ Int[γ̃]
of two closed counterclockwise contours γ, γ̃, then we have the contour deformation property
                             “                       “
(2.2)                           f (zm )g(z ) [dz]δ = f (zm )g(z ) [dz]δ .
                                     γ                          γ̃

Moreover, if f, g : Cm
                     δ → C are discrete holomorphic in a lattice neighborhood of a closed inte-
gration contour γ (i.e. ∂¯δ f (e ) = ∂¯δ g(e ) = 0 for any e ∈ γ), it is elementary to check (using
Abel’s resummation) that we have the integration by parts formula
                       “                                “
(2.3)                     (∂δ f (z ))g(zm ) [dz]δ = − f (zm ) (∂δ g(z )) [dz]δ .
                            γ                                     γ


2.4. Discrete Integer Monomials. We now summarize basic facts about the discrete ana-
logues z 7→ z [k] of the monomial functions z 7→ z k (for k ∈ Z), leaving proofs for Section 5.5.
These functions will later be used to construct the lattice counterparts of the holomorphic modes
of discrete holomorphic fields both on Cδ and Cm
                                                δ . In the following statement, we use the notation
                                               (
                                                 1 if z = w
                                      1w (z) =
                                                 0 if z 6= w
for the Kronecker delta function.
                     DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                  13



                                                                            oriented edge of Ccδ


                                                                            f defined on Cm
                                                                                          δ




                                                                            g defined on Cδ



        Figure 2.3. Discrete contour γ on the corner lattice Ccδ . Each (oriented) edge
       ~e ∈ γ of the contour separates a vertex e ∈ Cδ of the diamond lattice from a
        vertex em ∈ Cm
                     δ of the medial lattice.


Proposition 2.1. There exists a unique family of functions (z [k] )k∈Z , defined on Cδ ∪ Cm
                                                                                           δ , for
which the following properties hold:
   (1) For all k ∈ Z, the function z [k] has the same 90 degree rotational symmetry around 0 as
       the continuous function z 7→ z k does.
   (2) We have z [0] ≡ 1 on Cδ ∪ Cmδ.
   (3) For all k ≥ 0, we have ∂¯δ z [k] ≡ 0. For all k < 0, there exists R > 0 such that for any
       z ∈ Cδ ∪ Cm                            ¯ [k] ≡ 0.
                   δ with |z| ≥ R, we have ∂δ z
                                   [k]      [k−1]
   (4) For all k ∈ Z, we have ∂δ z = k z             .
   (5) We have ∂¯δ z [−1] = 2π10 on Cδ and ∂¯δ z [−1] = 2π 14 x=± δ ,± iδ 1x on Cm
                                                                 P
                                                                       2   2
                                                                                      δ.
   (6) For all k ≤ −1, we have z [k] → 0 as z → ∞.
   (7) For any fixed z ∈ Cδ ∪ Cmδ there exists N ≥ 0 such that z
                                                                         [k]
                                                                             = 0 for all k ≥ N .
                                   k [k]
   (8) As δ → 0, we have that δ z (extended, e.g., by linear interpolation) converges to the
       function z 7→ z k uniformly on compact sets for k ≥ 0 and uniformly away from the origin
       for k < 0.
   (9) For any k, ` ∈ Z, we have
                                         “
                                     1
                                           zm[k] z[`] [dz]δ = δk+`,−1
                                   2π i γ
       if γ is a sufficiently large closed counterclockwise contour surrounding the origin.
  (10) Setting
                                     {k}    1 X           δx [k]
                                   zm :=               z−
                                            4               2 
                                               x∈{±1,±i}
        for each k ∈ Z, we have for all k, ` ∈ Z
                                      “
                                   1
                                         z {k} z [`] [dz]δ = δk+`,−1
                                  2π i γ m 
        if γ is a sufficiently large closed counterclockwise contour surrounding the origin.
Proof. See Section 5.5.                                                                                
2.5. Discrete Half-Integer Monomials. In this subsection we discuss discrete analogues z 7→
z [p] to the functions z 7→ z p for half-integer exponents p ∈ Z+ 21 . As is the case for their continuous
analogues, these functions are not naturally defined on Cδ , but rather on the double cover of
Cδ , ramified at 0, denoted [Cδ , 0]. Above each vertex of Cδ \ {0}, there are now two vertices
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                  14
                                                                    √      √
v1 , v2 ∈ [Cδ , 0], each one with a well-defined square root v 1 = − v2 . For a vertex of [Cδ , 0],
there is a unique vertex of Cδ \ {0} called the base point, and another vertex of [Cδ , 0] called
the point on the opposite sheet. Two vertices v, w ∈ [Cδ , 0] are√adjacent√     if their respective base
points are adjacent and they are on the same sheet (i.e. <e ( v/ w) > 0): the graph [Cδ , 0]
is hence connected. We define analogously dual vertices, medial vertices, and diamond vertices,
and denote the relevant sets [C∗δ , 0], [Cm            
                                          δ , 0] and [Cδ , 0], respectively, and we continue to denote
adjacency by ∼. For a simple path λ ⊂ Cδ \ {0}, we say that two points a, b ∈ [Cδ , 0] with base
points√a0 , b0 √∈ λ are on the same sheet of λ if following the square root branch along λ one gets
from a to b.
For a function f : [Cδ , 0] → C, we will always set f (0) := 0 and define ∂δ f, ∂¯δ f : [Cm  δ , 0] → C
in the natural manner (i.e. taking z ± 2δ , z ± i 2δ on the same sheet as z). We say that such a
function has monodromy −1 around 0 if its values at points on opposite sheets are opposite (e.g.
the square root function has −1 monodromy), and we say that it is single-valued if the values
are equal.
The following lemma is easily verified.
                                            
Lemma 2.2. Let f : [Cm δ , 0] → C and g : [Cδ , 0] → C be two functions with monodromy −1
around 0. Then the function on the bi-medial edges e 7→ f (em )g(e ) is single-valued.
The existence, uniqueness and basic properties of the discrete half-integer monomials are sum-
marized in the following proposition.
                                                                   
Proposition 2.3. There exists a unique family of functions z [p] p∈Z+ 1 defined on the double
                                                                         2
cover of Cδ ∪ Cm
                δ ramified at 0 for which the following statements hold:

   (1) For all p, the function z [p] has the same 90 degree rotational symmetry around 0 as the
       continuous function z 7→ z p does.
        [− 1 ]
   (2) zm 2 is given by Definition 5.5.
         [1]
   (3) zm2 is given by Definition 5.11.
   (4) For all p ≥ 12 and z ∈ [Cδ m , 0], we have ∂¯δ z [p] = 0. For each p < 0, there exists K > 0
       such that ∂¯δ z [p] = 0 for all z ∈ [Cδ m , 0] with |z| ≥ K.
   (5) For all p ∈ Z + 21 , we have ∂δ z [p] = pz [p−1] .
   (6) For all p ≤ − 12 , we have z [p] → 0 as z → ∞.
   (7) For any fixed z ∈ Cδ ∪ Cm   δ there exists N ≥ 0 such that z
                                                                          [p]
                                                                              = 0 for all p ≥ N .
   (8) As δ → 0, we have that δ z converges to the function z 7→ z p uniformly on compact
                                      p [p]

       sets for p ≥ 0 and uniformly away from the origin for p < 0.
   (9) For any p, q ∈ Z + 21 , we have
                                            “
                                        1
                                              z [p] z [q] [dz]δ = δp+q,−1
                                       2π i γ m 
       if γ is a sufficiently large closed counterclockwise contour surrounding the origin.
  (10) Setting
                                                             [p]
                                    {p}    1 X             δx
                                   zm :=               z−          ,
                                           4                2 
                                                x∈{±1,±i}

        we have for all p, q ∈ Z + 12
                                           “
                                     1
                                               zm{p} z[q] [dz]δ = δp+q,−1
                                    2π i   γ
                     DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                   15

        if γ is a sufficiently large closed counterclockwise contour surrounding the origin.
Proof. See Section 5.5.                                                                                 
Remark 2.4. It is possible to prove that the properties 1, 4, 5, together with z [−1/2] z [1/2] → 1 as
z → ∞ imply the other ones.

                           3. Gaussian free field and Ising Model
3.1. Lattice Models and Field Theory. As discussed in the introduction, a lattice model M
associates to a discretization Ωδ ⊂ Cδ of a domain Ω ⊂ C a random field φδ : Ωδ → C living on
the discrete domain, i.e., a collection of (complex valued) random variables φδ (z) indexed by the
vertices z of the discrete domain. We now introduce (as in [GHP19]) a lattice model analogue
to the fundamental notion of local field in Conformal Field Theory. Intuitively, the value of a
lattice local field at a point z is the result of a translation invariant rule applied to the values
that φδ takes on a fixed finite neighborhood of z. For this, we assume furthermore that the field
φδ is extended to the complement Cδ \ Ωδ of the domain in some prescribed way.
Definition 3.1 (Lattice local field). Fix a lattice model M. For V ⊂ Z2 a finite subset and
F : CV → C a polynomial function, the random fields given by
                                           h            i
                                Oδ (z) = F φδ (z + xδ)
                                                                    x∈V
(for all possible choices of the discrete domain Ωδ ⊂ Cδ and of boundary conditions) constitute
a (polynomial) lattice local field for the model M. We denote by Floc
                                                                   M the C-vector space of such
lattice local fields.
Remark 3.2. The condition that F is polynomial does not entail any loss of generality in the
case of the Ising model. For the GFF, on the other hand, more general fields (e.g. L2 , such as
exponentials) could be handled by density.
Examples of local fields are the field φδ itself, its square φ2δ , its lattice derivative φδ (· − δ) − φδ ,
the product φδ (·)φδ (· + δ), etc. The correlations of lattice local fields are simply defined by
taking the expectation with respect to the measure of the model.
For critical lattice models such as the Gaussian free field and the Ising model, it is natural to:
     • expect that every lattice local field converges to some CFT local field;
     • expect that every CFT local field can be recovered as a limit of a suitably chosen lattice
       local field.
This convergence should hold in the sense that the (suitably renormalized) correlations of the
lattice local fields converge to those of the CFT local fields, when taken at far apart points:
fields in QFT are defined by their correlations. As a result, fields with the same correlations
should be identified. This motivates the following:
Definition 3.3 (Null field). A lattice local field Oδ is called null (for a given model M) if its
correlations against any other lattice local fields vanish (for that model) as soon as the domain
is large enough and the other insertions are far enough from z, i.e., there exists R > 0 such that
if z is at distance at least δR from z1 , . . . , zn and from Cδ \ Ωδ , then we have
                                   EΩδ [Oδ (z)φδ (z1 ) · · · φδ (zn )] = 0.
Two lattice local fields are said to be (correlation-)equivalent if their difference is null. The
subspace of null fields within the space of all local fields of a model is denoted by Fnull   loc
                                                                                       M ⊂ FM .
                     DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                     16

A more precise formulation of the conjectural correspondence of lattice local fields to CFT local
fields is:
      • we expect that for any local fields O1 , . . . , On of the CFT describing the scaling limit of
        the lattice model in question, there exist lattice local fields O1δ , . . . , Onδ ∈ Floc
                                                                                             M and scaling
                                                                     δ
        dimensions D1 , . . . , Dn ∈ [0, ∞) (with each Di and Oi depending on Oi only) such that
        if zjδ → zj as δ → 0 (with z1 , . . . , zn distinct), we have
                        1
                              EΩδ O1δ z1δ · · · Onδ znδ −→ O1 (z1 ) · · · On (zn ) Ω .
                                                       
                     Pn
                          D
                    δ i=1 i                                 δ→0

The construction of the present paper is a decisive tool to establish this conjecture for the discrete
Gaussian free field and the Ising model. In particular, it gives an explicit way to construct the
lattice precursors of all the Ising CFT descendant fields (a fortiori, since the algebraic structure
of the descendant fields is already present at the lattice level).

3.2. Discrete Gaussian Free Field. The discrete Gaussian free field (dGFF) on a (finite)
discrete domain Ωδ ⊂ Cδ (with Dirichlet boundary conditions)    is a random field ϕ : Cδ → R with
                                                  1
                                                          
ϕ C \Ω ≡ 0 and density proportional to exp − 16π E [ϕ] , where the discrete Dirichlet energy E
    δ  δ

is defined by E [ϕ] := x∼y (ϕ (x) − ϕ (y))2 . Equivalently, the dGFF ϕ is a centered Gaussian
                       P
field with covariance given by a multiple of the discrete Laplacian Green’s function of Ωδ with 0
boundary conditions:
                                     E[ϕ(z)ϕ(w)] = 8π GΩδ (z, w),
where the Green’s function is determined by ∆δ GΩδ (·, w) = −1w (·) and GΩδ (z, w) = 0 unless
z, w ∈ Ωδ . The dGFF is a natural discretization of the continuous Gaussian free field on Ω
(which is a random generalized function Ω → R). Like any centered Gaussian field, the dGFF
satisfies the bosonic Wick’s formula:
                                                     n
                                                   X Y                
                         E[ϕ(x1 ) · · · ϕ(x2n )] =     E ϕ(x`j )ϕ(xrj ) ,
                                                    {`j ,rj } j=1

where the sum is over all pairings {`1 , r1 } , . . . , {`n , rn } of {1, . . . , 2n}. The dGFF is a discrete
harmonic field in the following sense.
Lemma 3.4. We have
                "                  n
                                             #      n
                                                                          "               #
                                   Y                X                         Y
                     E (∆δ ϕ)(x)         ϕ(xj ) =         (−8π 1xi (x)) × E          ϕ(xj )
                                   j=1              i=1                       j6=i
                   h                     i
and in particular E (∆δ ϕ)(x) nj=1 ϕ(xj ) = 0 for x ∈ Ωδ \ {x1 , . . . , xn }.
                             Q

Proof. This follows directly from Wick’s formula and the covariance being 8π times the discrete
Laplacian Green’s function.                                                                  
In particular, it follows from Lemma 3.4 that the discrete Laplacian of the discrete Gaussian
free field is a null local field in the sense of Definition 3.3: ∆δ ϕ ∈ Fnull
                                                                         G .
One of the most natural lattice local fields associated with the dGFF is the following lattice
                                                                 
holomorphic current J : Cm     δ → C. We first extend ϕ to Cδ by setting it to zero outside of Ωδ
and on the dual lattice. Then we may define the current as
                                             J (z) = i ∂δ ϕ(z).
                   DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                            17

As defined, the current is not exactly the discrete analogue of the continuous current, as it is
purely real on midpoints of vertical edges and purely imaginary on midpoints of horizontal edges.
This is however not important for our approach, as the objects we will build out of the current
J are contour integrals, which do approximate the continuous integrals.
We have that the current J is discrete holomorphic in the sense of correlations.
Lemma 3.5. Let Ωδ ⊂ Cδ be a discrete domain, let V ⊂ Ωδ be a finite set and F : RV →
              function. Then we have that the function G : Ωδ → C defined by G(z) :=
C a polynomial
         
E F ϕ V J(z) is discrete holomorphic for z away from Cδ \ Ωδ and from V .

Proof. This directly follows from the harmonicity of the dGFF since ∂¯δ ∂δ = 14 ∆δ .           
The assumption that F is polynomial is chosen as it is general enough for our purposes, and
specific enough so that the integrals exist.
At coinciding points, the lattice current has singularities, yielding nonzero contour integrals.
The following elementary lemma will in particular be most useful:
Lemma 3.6. Let Ωδ ⊂ Cδ be a discrete domain, let V ⊂ Ωδ be a finite set and F : RV → C be
a polynomial function. Let w ∈ Cm δ be a point away from V . Consider the dGFF on a domain
Ωδ that includes a neighborhood of w. Then for any closed counterclockwise contour γ such
that z ∈ Int[γ], Int[γ] ⊂ Ωδ and Int[γ] ∩ V = ∅, and any function f : Cδ → C that is discrete
holomorphic on Int[γ] we have
                     “
                  1                                                    
                        E J(w)J(zm )F ϕ V f (z ) [dz]δ = ∂δ f (w) E F ϕ V .
                 2π i γ
Proof. Observe first that for any x ∈ Cδ that is adjacent to w, Stokes’ formula (2.1) combined
with Wick’s formula for the dGFF ϕ with the explicit covariance 8π GΩδ yield
                              “
                                                      
                                E ϕ(x) ∂δ ϕ(zm ) F ϕ V f (z ) [dz]δ
                                γ
                                    X
                                             E ϕ(x) ∂¯δ ∂δ ϕ(z ) F ϕ V f (z )
                                                                      
                           =i
                                z ∈Int[γ]
                                                
                           = − 2π i f (x) E F ϕ V .
By taking a linear combination of the above over the four x ∈ Cδ adjacent to w, the assertion
of the lemma follows.                                                                        

3.3. Ising Model. We consider the Ising model on finite square grid domains Ωδ ⊂ Cδ , and we
allow for general boundary conditions. The boundary conditions are implemented by a choice
of a fixed configuration σ : Cδ \ Ωδ → {−1, 0, +1} outside the domain, and the sample space of
allowed configurations of the model is then
          n                                                                       o
            σ : Cδ → {−1, 0, 1} σx ∈ {−1, +1} for x ∈ Ωδ , and σx = σ x for x ∈
                                                                              / Ωδ .
The constant function σ ≡ +1 is known as plus boundary conditions, the constant function σ ≡
−1 as minus boundary conditions, and the constant function σ ≡ 0 as free boundary condi-
tions. Our general boundary conditions can thus be combinations of these. The energy of a
configuration σ is defined as
                                              X
                                    H[σ] = −     σx σy ,
                                                        x∼y
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                18




                                    p




                                                            %

                                                    q


         Figure 3.1. A disorder line % is a path between two dual vertices p, q ∈ C∗δ .

where the sum is over nearest neighbor pairs such that at least one of the vertices x, y belongs to
the (finite) domain Ωδ . Given an inverse temperature parameter β > 0, the probability measure
of the model assigns probability proportional to e−βH[σ] to √   each allowed configuration σ. The
                                                           1
                                                                       
critical value for β that is of interest for CFT is βcr. = 2 ln 2 + 1 .
Among the most natural local fields
                                 √
                                        of the Ising model are the spin field ςδ (x) := σx and the
                                   2
energy field εδ (x) := σx σx+δ − 2 . A number of results about the convergence and conformal
invariance of the correlations of δ −1/8 ςδ and δ −1 εδ as δ → 0 with various boundary conditions
have been established in [CHI15, Hon10, HoSm13, CHI19].

3.3.1. Disorder Operators. The connection between the Ising model and complex analysis is
more involved than for the GFF: it involves non-local fields, i.e., objects which have a point of
insertion, which are functions of the spin configuration, and which have correlations, but which
cannot be represented as lattice local fields. The most basic non-local fields are the disorder
operators.
Definition 3.7. By a disorder line between p and q we mean a simple path % on the dual
lattice C∗δ with endpoints p, q ∈ C∗δ . We denote thisP  % : p ↔ q. For an Ising configuration
(σx )x∈Cδ define the disorder energy of % by E% [σ] =     x∼y:hxyi∗ ∈% σx σy . For a disorder line %
between p and q we define the disorder pair (µp µq )% as the random variable
                                                              
(3.1)                            (µp µq )% = exp − 2βcr. E% [σ] .

Note that for a fixed disorder line %, a disorder pair (µp µq )% defines a lattice local field of the
Ising model, whereas a single disorder operator “µp ” could not be defined as such.
Intuitively, reweighting a correlation by a disorder pair (µp µq )% , i.e., considering the reweighted
measure
                                            E[(µp µq )% F [σ]]
                                       F 7→                    ,
                                               E[(µp µq )% ]
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                       19

corresponds to an Ising model where the spins ‘pretend’ that their neighbors across % are
equal to the opposite of their actual values. The following lemma (due to [KaCe71], see
also [Dub11a, Dub11b, CCK17]) tells us that disorder pair correlations are essentially dependent
on the endpoints of the path only (and hence they are sometimes called quasi-local fields).
Lemma 3.8. Let Γ1 , Γ2 be two collections of k disjoint disorder lines such that the sets of 2k
endpoints of both collections are the same. Let Γ1 ⊕ Γ2 denote the collection of loops made of
the symmetric difference of the sets of dual edges ∪%1 ∈Γ1 %1 and ∪%2 ∈Γ2 %2 . Let V ⊂ Cδ be a finite
set. Consider the Ising model on a large enough domain Ωδ , with arbitrary boundary conditions.
We have
               "         !                 #            "          !                   #
                  Y          Y                              Y          Y
(3.2)        E        σv          (µp µq )% = (−1)N E           σv            (µp µq )% ,
                  v∈V       %:p↔q∈Γ1                        v∈V       %:p↔q∈Γ2

where the N is the number of pairs (v, `) where v ∈ V and ` ∈ Γ1 ⊕ Γ2 is a loop surrounding v.

Proof. For each loop ` ∈ Γ1 ⊕ Γ2 , let S` : {±1}Ωδ → {±1}Ωδ be the involution that flips all the
spins contained inside of ` and leaves the other ones unchanged (see Figures ?? and 3.3 in Sec-
tion 3.3.2 for an example of similar gauge transformation). Let S denote the gauge transform con-
sisting of composition of all the (commuting) S` for ` ∈ Γ1 ⊕ Γ2 . For a configuration σ ∈ {±1}Ωδ ,
and j = 1, 2, consider                               X
                                      Hj := H[σ] + 2     E% [σ].
                                                     %∈Γj

Proving (3.2) hence amounts to showing that
                               !                                               !
                  X      Y                                  X       Y
                             σv e−βH1 [σ] = (−1)N                         σ
                                                                          ev       e−βH2 [eσ] ,
                 σ∈{±1}Ωδ   v∈V                        e∈{±1}Ωδ
                                                       σ            v∈V
                                                            Q                       N Q
which simply follows by observing that if σ
                                          e = S[σ], then        v∈V σv = (−1)                 ev and H2 [e
                                                                                          v∈V σ          σ] =
H1 [σ].                                                                                                    

3.3.2. Corner Lattice Fermions. Informally, a fermion operator ψ consists of a spin (living on
the primal lattice Cδ ) next to a disorder (living on the dual lattice C∗δ ); a natural location for
a fermion is hence at a corner (between a vertex and and a dual vertex). Again, due to the
non-locality of the disorder operator, we define correlations of pairs of fermions with a defect
path between them; later, we show that only the sign of correlations is affected by the choice of
the path.
Definition 3.9. Let c be a corner between x ∈ Cδ and p ∈ C∗δ and let d be a corner between
y ∈ Cδ and q ∈ C∗δ . We define a corner defect line λ with corner-ends c, d ∈ Ccδ as the
concatenation [cp] ⊕ % ⊕ [qd] of a disorder line % with endpoints p, q with the two corner segments
[cp] and [qd]. We denote λ : c ↔ d, and we call % : p ↔ q the main part of λ. We call x, y the
spin-ends and p, q the disorder-ends of λ. We denote by W (λ : c ; d) the cumulative angle of
turns by λ (also known as winding) traversed from c to d.

Remark 3.10. While the definition of W is the same as that in related works [CHI15, ChSm12,
Hon10, HoSm13], the defect line is not the same object as the path appearing in the low-
temperature expansion of the fermionic observables of these works. That path should interpreted
as a line of frustration and should be viewed as a configuration-dependent object, unlike the
defect line, which is fixed.
                     DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                      20




            p c                                                 z−1+i     z+1+i
                    x                                           z−1−i
                                                                        z z   +1−i




                                         λ                                                           λ
                                  q                                             w−1+i     w+1+i
                              d                                                 w−1−i
                                                                                        w w   +1−i

                              y

          (a) A corner defect line λ associated with        (b) A medial defect line λ associated with
          the corner lattice fermion pair (ψc ψd )λ ,       fermion pair (ψ(w)ψ(z))λ (cf.        Defini-
          for c, d ∈ Ccδ (cf.        Definitions 3.9        tions 3.18 and 3.19). This fermion pair
          and 3.11). In this figure the winding is          is defined by summing over corner lattice
          W (λ : c ; d) = π/4 and the direction of          fermion pairs corresponding to the four cor-
          the corner c is ν(c) = e−iπ/4 .                   ners zx ∈ Ccδ adjacent to z ∈ Cm δ and the
                                                            four corners wy ∈ Ccδ adjacent to w ∈ Cm  δ
                                                            (where x, y ∈ {±1 ± i}).

               Figure 3.2. Corner lattice fermions and medial lattice fermions.
We now introduce the lattice fermion pair that we will work with, a complexification of that
introduced by Kadanoff and Ceva [KaCe71], see also [Dub11a, Dub11b].
Definition 3.11. Let λ be a corner defect line with corner-ends c, d, spin-ends x, y and disorder-
ends p, q. Let
                                         x−p       πi      3π i
                                ν(c) :=         ∈ e± 4 , e± 4
                                        |x − p|
denote the direction of the corner c. We define the fermion pair (ψc ψd )λ as
                                                        i
                              (ψc ψd )λ = −ν(c) e− 2 W(λ:c;d) (µp µq )% σx σy .
Remark 3.12. The two-point correlation function of the corner lattice fermion coincides with the
two-point observable defined in [GHP19], in the special case when + boundary conditions are
imposed and no other fields are inserted in the correlations. However, the definition of corner
lattice fermion given above makes the nature of the fermion pair (with fixed defect line) as a
local field (i.e., as a function of a finite number of spins) transparent and explicit.
Despite the apparent difference of rôle of c and d in the definition, the fermion pair is antisym-
metric.
Lemma 3.13. Let λ be a corner disorder line with corner-ends c, d. Then we have (ψc ψd )λ +
(ψd ψc )λ = 0.
                                                            i                            i
Proof. It is elementary to check that −ν(c) e− 2 W(λ:c;d) = +ν(d) e− 2 W(λ:d;c) , and the rest is
unchanged.                                                                                     
                   DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                              21




                  z                                    z
                                                                       λ0



                                      λ
                               w                                   w



       Figure 3.3. The defect line λ0 on the right is obtained from the defect line λ on
       the left by performing the gauge transformation which flips the spins in the shaded
       area.

Fixing the two corners c, d, we have that the dependence on λ of (ψc ψd )λ is not due to local
factors.
Lemma 3.14. Let λ, λ̃ be two corner defect lines sharing the same corner-ends c, d. Let λ ⊕ λ̃
denote the collection of loops of C∗δ made of the symmetric difference of λ and λ̃. Let V ⊂ Cδ be a
finite subset. Consider the Ising model on a large enough Ωδ , with arbitrary boundary conditions.
We have                "         !         #            "         !          #
                           Y                               Y
                     E         σv (ψc ψd )λ = (−1)N E           σv (ψc ψd )λ̃ ,
                         v∈V                               v∈V

where N is the number of pairs (v, `) where v ∈ V and ` ∈ λ ⊕ λ̃ surrounds v.
Proof. The proof uses the same bijection as the proof of Lemma 3.8 (see Figure 3.3). It is
                                i
elementary to check that the e− 2 W(λ) term in the definition of the fermion compensates for the
change of the spins adjacent to the corners c, d. The rest behaves in the same manner, thus
yielding the result.                                                                          
The following lemma, which allows one to exchange defect lines between four fermions, will be
instrumental in our construction:.
Lemma 3.15. Let V ⊂ Cδ be a finite set and F : {±1}V → C. Let c1 , c2 , c3 , c4 be distinct
corners. For i < j, let λij : ci ↔ cj be corner defect lines which are disjoint when the indices
have no overlap, i.e., λ12 ∩ λ34 = λ13 ∩ λ24 = λ14 ∩ λ23 = ∅. If (λ12 ⊕ λ34 ) ⊕ (λ13 ⊕ λ24 ) and
(λ12 ⊕ λ34 ) ⊕ (λ14 ⊕ λ23 ) do not contain loops surrounding any point of V , then for any large
enough Ωδ (with arbitrary boundary conditions) we have
                                                                                            
             E F (σ|V ) (ψc1 ψc2 )λ12 (ψc3 ψc4 )λ34 = − E F (σ|V ) (ψc1 ψc3 )λ13 (ψc2 ψc4 )λ24
                                                                                            
                                                     = E F (σ|V ) (ψc1 ψc4 )λ14 (ψc2 ψc3 )λ23 .
Proof. Let us only prove the first equality (the other one is symmetric). For each loop ` ∈
(λ12 ⊕ λ34 ) ⊕ (λ13 ⊕ λ24 ), which by assumption does not surround points of V , define the gauge
transform S` that flips the spins inside it as before. We can assume that ` is a loop that includes
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                      22




               c1                                                 c1
                                         c4                                                          c4


                                                                         c3
                    c3



                           c2                                                 c2

            (a) Corner lattice fermion pairs                   (b) Corner lattice fermion pairs
            (ψc1 ψc2 )λ12 (ψc3 ψc4 )λ34 .                      (ψc1 ψc3 )λ13 (ψc2 ψc4 )λ24 .


       Figure 3.4. A gauge transformation involving two fermion pairs, and consisting
       of a flip of the spin at the center of the shaded square.

edges of λ12 , λ34 , λ13 and λ24 : otherwise the gauge transform S` just amounts to displacing a
piece of an individual defect line, without exchanging the lines endpoints, and this case can be
handled by an application of Lemma 3.14. By composing enough gauge transforms which do not
affect the left-hand and right-hand side, we can actually assume that ` is a square surrounding
only one spin, with its horizontal edges belonging to λ12 and λ34 and its vertical edges belonging
to λ13 and λ24 . It is then elementary to check that S` affects the fermions in the desired way
(see Figure 3.4).
                                                                                                

The above lemma generalizes to the following.
Proposition 3.16. Let V ⊂ Cδ be finite. Let c1 , . . . , c2k be distinct corners. Let
                                Λ = {λ1 : c1 ↔ c2 , . . . , λk : c2k−1 ↔ c2k }
be a collection of k disjoint corner defect lines and let Λ̃ be a collection of k disjoint corner
defect lines λ̃j : cmj ↔ cnj linking the c1 , . . . , c2k pairwise, with mj < nj . Let Λ ⊕ Λ̃ the set of
                                                               
loops made of the symmetric difference ∪ λj ⊕ ∪ λ̃j , and let N denote the number of pairs
(v, `) with v ∈ V and ` ∈ Λ ⊕ Λ̃ surrounding v. Let C denote the number of crossings of the pair
partition {(mj , nj )} of {1, . . . , 2k}, i.e. the number of pairs j < k such that mj < mk < nj < nk .
Consider the Ising model on a large enough domain Ωδ with arbitrary boundary conditions. We
have
                          "             !                              #
                              Y                                    
                        E            σv ψc1 ψc2 λ1 · · · ψc2k−1 ψc2k λ
                                                                         k
                            v∈V
                                     "              !                                        #
                                         Y
                     = (−1)N +C E
                                                                                  
                                               σv       ψcm1 ψcn1 λ1 · · · ψcmk ψcnk λ           .
                                                                                         k
                                         v∈V
                     DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                  23

Proof. This follows from Lemmas 3.14 and 3.15, by induction on k.                                      

This then yields the following important proposition, which allows one to avoid specifying the
defect paths:
Proposition 3.17. Let V ⊂ Cδ be a finite and connected set and let Ωδ ⊃ V be a large enough
domain. Consider the Ising model on Ωδ with arbitrary boundary conditions. Let [Ωδ , V ] denote
the double cover of Ωδ \ V ramified around V . For c1 , . . . , c2k ∈ [Ωcδ , V ] and any F : {±1}V → C,
the correlation
                                h                          i
                               E F σ|V ψ(c1 ) · · · ψ(c2k )
                                h                                     i
                            := E F σ|V ψc1 ψc2 λ1 · · · ψc2k−1 ψc2k λ
                                                                         k


is independent of the choice of λ1 : c1 ↔ c2 , . . . , λk : c2k−1 ↔ c2k , provided the λj ’s stay away
from V and that
              c2j−1        , c2j are on the same sheet of [Cδ , V ] when going along λj . The resulting
correlation E F σ|V ψ(c1 ) · · · ψ(c2k ) is totally antisymmetric with respect to permutations of
the variables c1 , . . . , c2k . It is single-valued as a function of each cj if F is even and has −1
monodromy around V if F is odd.

Proof. By the Proposition 3.16, the only dependence on a path such as λ1 is through its lift to
the double cover (if we modify λ1 by a symmetric difference of two loops both surrounding V ,
it does not change the correlations). If we modify λ1 by a loop surrounding V , the correlation
will change sign if F is odd and stay constant if F is even. The antisymmetry follows from
Lemmas 3.13 and 3.14.                                                                         

3.3.3. Discrete Holomorphic Fermions. We now introduce the discrete holomorphic fermions,
which live on the medial lattice: informally they are simply the averages of the corner fermions
taken at the four corners surrounding a medial vertex. At criticality, their correlations are
discrete holomorphic (Proposition 3.22).
Definition 3.18. Let w, z ∈ Cm       δ be medial vertices. We define a medial defect line λ with
medial-ends w, z as the concatenation [wp] ⊕ % ⊕ [qz] where p, q ∈ C∗δ are adjacent to w, z and %
is a simple path on the dual lattice, called the main part of λ. We say that two (corner, medial)
defect lines differ only locally, if their endpoints are either the same or neighbors and the main
parts differ by at most the dual edges containing the endpoints.

Let us now introduce the key object: the discrete holomorphic fermion, which lives on the medial
lattice (see Figure 2(b)).
                                                                    δ
Definition 3.19. For z ∈ Cm   δ and x ∈ {±1 ± i}, let zx := z + 4 x denote the corner adjacent
                                                                      δ
to z in direction x; for w ∈ Cm
                              δ and y ∈ {±1 ± i} write wy := w + 4 y analogously. Fix a medial
defect line λ with medial ends z, w, and let λyx denote the corner defect lines with corner ends wy
and zx such that the main parts of λyx and λ differ at most by the edges containing w, z. We
define the discrete holomorphic fermion pair (ψ(w)ψ(z))λ by
                                              π     X              
                           (ψ(w)ψ(z))λ = √                  ψwy ψzx λyx ,
                                            8 2 x,y∈{±1±i}
                                              i
where if wy = zx , we interpret −ν̄ (wy ) e− 2 W(λyx ) := |z−w|
                                                           z−w
                                                                in Definition 3.11.
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                24

Remark 3.20. The correlations of (ψ(w)ψ(z))λ taken in a domain     with + boundary conditions
                                                           P √ζ             
and without any other fields correspond to the observable ζ,ξ ξ fΩδ wζ , z ξ of [Hon10], where
                                                                √

the sum is taken over the possible orientations of the edges e(w) and e(z).

The antisymmetry is naturally inherited from the corner-lattice fermion.
Lemma 3.21. For a medial defect line λ with (distinct) medial-ends w, z have that
                                  (ψ(w)ψ(z))λ = − (ψ(z)ψ(w))λ .

Proof. Straightforward from Lemma 3.13.                                                             

By Lemma 3.14 the correlations of this fermion pair are independent of the choice of the defect
line λ, up to a sign. We thus omit the defect line from the notation, and consider the corre-
lations defined on the appropriate double cover. A fundamental property of the correlations of
(ψ(w)ψ(z)) is their discrete holomorphicity apart from singularities when w and z coincide.
Proposition 3.22. Let Ωδ ⊂ Cδ be a discrete domain and let V ⊂ Ωδ be a connected set.
Consider the Ising model on Ωδ with arbitrary boundary conditions. Let [Ωδ , V ] denote the
                                                                                      ∗
double cover of Ωδ \ V ramified around V . Let W ⊂ V , let w ∈ [Ωm                          m
                                                                     δ , V ] and let w ∈ [Ωδ , V ]
                                                                                m
share the same base point, on the opposite sheet. Consider the function H : [Ωδ , V ] → C defined
by
                                         "         !           #
                                             Y
                               H(z) := E         σx ψ(w)ψ(z) .
                                               x∈W

Then for ζ ∈ [Ωδ , V ] away from ∂Ωδ , V , we have
                                   ∂¯δ H(ζ) = 0                if ζ 6∼ w, w∗
                                               "        #
                                             π   Y
                          and      ∂¯δ H(ζ) = E      σx            if ζ ∼ w.
                                             2   x∈W


Proof. See Section 6.2.                                                                             

We will mostly use the above result in the following form:
Corollary 3.23. Let W ⊂ V ⊂ Cδ , w ∈ [Ωm                            m
                                                δ , V ], and H : [Ωδ , V ] → C be as above. If γ is a
contractible closed contour on the double cover [Ωδ , V ] such that Int[γ] ⊃ w ± 2δ , w ± i2δ and
                                                        c

such that Int[γ] ∩ V = ∅ and f : [Ωδ , V ] → C is discrete holomorphic on Int[γ], then
                        “                             "        #
                      1                          1        Y         X
                           f (z )H(zm ) [dz]δ = E          σx                    f (wx ).
                    2π i γ                       4      x∈W      x∈{± 2δ ,± i2δ }


Proof. Using the discrete Stokes’ formula (2.1), the contractible contour γ can be deformed to
the trivial contour plaquette by plaquette, and only the plaquettes with non-zero ∂¯δ H contribute
to the contour integral. Proposition 3.22 states that these plaquettes are exactly the ζ ∼ w and
gives the values ∂¯δ H(ζ).                                                                      
Remark 3.24. We can say informally that z 7→ ψ(w)ψ(z) has four discrete poles of residue 41 at
the four diamond vertices next to w, as long as we avoid ∂Ωδ , V and w∗ .
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                25

                       4. Virasoro Algebra at the Lattice Level

In this section, we implement at the lattice level the Virasoro mode operators Ln , n ∈ Z, for the
discrete Gaussian free field and the Ising model. The idea is to consider the relevant Laurent
modes of the discrete holomorphic current and fermion, respectively, to obtain commutation
relations and to construct the Virasoro modes from them. At all stages of the construction
we need to make sure that we indeed obtain lattice local fields (modulo lattice null fields) and
hence work on probabilistic objects rather than just on an abstract notion of fields. It is quite
remarkable that this is possible at all, given how rigid the theory of discrete complex analysis
is (in particular, the fact that the product of two discrete holomorphic functions is not discrete
holomorphic in general), and given how simple our definition of lattice local field is.

Throughout this section, discrete contour integration is performed over (closed counterclockwise)
discrete contours γ on the corner lattice, as in Section 2, and we denote by Int[γ] the set of points
surrounded by γ. For a lattice local field O, we will denote by DO the smallest disk D (0, ρ)
centered at the origin  such that O(0) does not depend on field values outside of D (0, ρ). For
k ∈ Z ∪ Z + 12 , we will denote by Dk the smallest disk D (0, ρ) such that z [k] is discrete
                 
holomorphic outside of D (0, ρ).




4.1. Gaussian free field. We first address the case of the discrete Gaussian free field. Let
us denote by Floc
                G the space of dGFF local fields and FG
                                                         null
                                                              the subspace of null fields, as in
Definitions 3.1 and 3.3. Our construction of the Laurent mode operators will take place in the
space


                                            FG = Floc null
                                                  G /FG



of correlation equivalence classes of local fields of dGFF.




4.1.1. Current Modes. Let us recall that we denote by J(z) = i ∂ϕ(z) the discrete holomorphic
current. Below we define its discrete Laurent modes Jk , k ∈ Z.

Definition 4.1. Let O ∈ Floc     G be a lattice local field and let k ∈ Z. Let γ be such that
Int[γ] ⊃ DO ∪ Dk . To define a new local field Jγk O ∈ Floc                                     γ
                                                         G , it is enough to specify its value Jk O(0)
                                                                                          γ
at the origin, since local fields are given by a translation invariant rule. We define Jk O(0) by

                                                   “
                                             1
                               Jγk O(0) =              O(0)J(zm )z[k] [dz]δ .
                                            2π i   γ
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                               26




                            γ               V
                                                   0

                                                                      z




Lemma 4.2. The following properties hold for Jγk O:
   (a) If O ∈ Floc
               G is a local field and γ, γ̃ are two large enough closed counterclockwise contours,
       then we have Jγk O − Jγ̃k O ∈ Fnull
                                      G .
                   loc                                     e ∈ Fnull and γ is a large enough closed
   (b) If O, O ∈ FG are two local fields such that O − O
             e
                                                                G
       counterclockwise contour, then we have Jγk O − Jγk O e ∈ Fnull .
                                                                 G

Proof. independent Consider two different contours γ and γ̃. It follows from discrete holomor-
            [k]
phicity of z (Proposition 2.1(3)), discrete holomorphicity of correlations of J(zm ) (Lemma 3.5),
and the contour deformation property (2.2), that the correlations of Jγk O(0) and Jγ̃k O(0) with
other insertions at large enough distance are equal. In other words, Jγ̃k O − Jγk O is null. This
proves (a).
Consider then two different local fields O and O   e such that O − O   e is null. Provided that the
                                                                                        
contour γ is sufficiently large, then for any zm on γ, the correlations of O(0) − O(0)
                                                                                    e     J(zm ) with
other insertions sufficiently far away are vanishing. Therefore, by linearity, the correlations of
Jγk O(0) − Jγk O(0)
               e    with other insertions are also vanishing, so indeed Jγk O − Jγk Oe is null. This
proves (b).                                                                                        

This lemma hence allows one to define the current mode action on the space FG of dGFF local
fields modulo null fields.
Definition 4.3. For a lattice local field O ∈ Floc
                                               G and k ∈ Z, we define Jk O ∈ FG as the
correlation equivalence class
                                        Jk O := Jγk O + Fnull
                                                         G ,

which is independent of the choice of a large enough γ by Lemma 4.2(b). Moreover, by
Lemma 4.2(a) we have that the Jk O only depends on the correlation equivalence class of O,
so this defines operators
                                      Jk : FG → FG .
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                              27

The following annihilation property for the current modes will be important to define the Vira-
soro modes below.

Lemma 4.4. Let O be a lattice local field. There exists K > 0 such that for any k ≥ K, Jk O = 0
modulo Fnull
        G .


Proof. With a large but fixed contour γ, by Item 7 of Proposition 2.1 we can choose K such that
                                              [k]
for all z on the contour and k ≥ K we have z = 0. It then follows directly from the definition
that Jγk O = 0.                                                                                

Proposition 4.5. The operators (Jk )k∈Z form a representation of the Heisenberg algebra on FG ,
i.e., for all k, l ∈ Z we have the commutation relation

                                                   [Jk , J` ] = kδk,−` idFG .

Proof. Let O be a lattice local field and let γ, γ− , γ+ be sufficiently large closed counterclock-
wise contours nested around each other so that Int[γ− ] ⊂ Int[γ] ⊂ Int[γ+ ]. The local field
 γ               γ
Jk+ Jγ` O − Jγ` Jk− O is by definition a difference of two double contour integrals. The discrete holo-
morphicity of the current J (Lemma 3.5) allows us to deform these contours within correlations.
More precisely, if V ⊂ Cδ is a finite set located far enough outside the outermost contour γ+
and F (ϕ|V ) is a polynomial of the values of the DGFF in V , then we can write
                     γ                         γ
               E[(Jk+ Jγ` O(0) − Jγ` Jk− O(0)) F (ϕ|V )]
                "           “         “
                     1
              =E          2
                                 [dz]δ [dw]δ J(zm )J(wm )z[k] w[`]
                  (2π i)      γ+         γ
                             “         “                                       #
                                                              [k] [`]
                            − [dw]δ        [dz]δ J(wm )J(zm )z w O(0) F (ϕ|V )
                                 γ                 γ−
                             “  “                                                                        
                      1                                                         
              =E                               J(zm )J(wm )z[k] w[`] [dz]δ        [dw]δ       O(0) F (ϕ|V ) ,
                    (2π i)2      γ        γw

where the w-integration is kept intact while for each fixed w the difference of the z-integrals
have been combined and deformed to a “satellite integral” along a part γw encircling w clockwise
(see Figure 4.1). We then apply Lemma 3.6 to evaluate the inner satellite integral, using also
properties of discrete monomials (Proposition 2.1), and we get
                                      γ                        γ
                                E[(Jk+ Jγ` O(0) − Jγ` Jk− O(0)) F (ϕ|V )]
                                       “                               
                                    1           [k−1] [`]
                              =E              kwm w [dw]δ O(0) F (ϕ|V )
                                   2π i     γ
                                                         
                              = kδk,−` E O(0) F (ϕ|V ) .

This equality shows that up to null fields we have
                                  γ                        γ
                                 Jk+ Jγ` O(0) − Jγ` Jk− O(0) ≡ kδk,−` O(0),

which proves the asserted commutation relation of Jk and J` .                                                     
                   DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                             28




      γ+       γ     V                                         γ         γ− V
                             0                    −                             0
                                                                                    z
                                   w                                                    w
                                        z




                                   γ         V
                         =                        0
                                                        γw
                                                                     z
                                                               w




       Figure 4.1. The commutator [Jk , J` ] is expressed as the difference of two integrals
       where the order of the z and w contours are exchanged, yielding a ‘satellite’ contour
       integral over z ‘orbiting’ around w, which itself orbits around 0 and the finite set V
       of points used to define the local field O on which the modes are acting.

4.1.2. Gaussian free field Virasoro Modes.
Definition 4.6. We define the operator LGn : FG → FG by
                                                          k
                                              1   X      ←→
                                        LGn =         (Jn−k Jk )
                                             2 k∈Z

where we set
                                           (
                                        k
                                       ←→   AB           if k ≥ 0
                                    (AB) =
                                            BA           if k < 0.
Remark 4.7. By virtue of Lemma 4.4, the sum above is well-defined as an operator on the
space FG of lattice local fields: there are only finitely many non-null terms, when the sum acts
on (the correlation equivalence class of) any given lattice local field.
Remark 4.8. Our choice of the above definition is guided by the convenience of the  P calculations
below, but it can also be easily seen to agree with the common definition LGn = 12 k∈Z : Jn−k Jk :
where the normal-ordered product : Jj Jk : is defined as Jj Jk if j ≤ k and as Jk Jj otherwise.
                   DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                             29

Lemma 4.9. For any n, m, k ∈ Z, we have
                        G     
                        Ln , Jm = −m Jn+m
                               k               k                      k
                      G      ←→             ←→                     ←→
                      Ln , (Jm−k Jk ) = −k(Jm−k Jn+k ) − (m − k) (Jn+m−k Jk ).

Proof. The second formula follows from the first by using the commutator identity [A, BC] =
B[A, C]+[A, B]C, so it remains to prove the first formula. Observe first that by the commutator
identity [AB, C] = A[B, C] + [A, C]B and Proposition 4.5 we have, when k + ` = n,
               [J` Jk , Jm ] = J` [Jk , Jm ] + [J` , Jm ]Jk
                           = J` k δk+m,0 + ` δ`+m,0 Jk = −m (δk,−m + δk,n+m ) Jn+m .
Using this, we calculate
                   G      1 X  ←k→             
                   Ln , Jm =       (Jn−k Jk ), Jm
                             2 k∈Z
                             1 X                             
                           =        − m (δk,−m + δk,n+m ) Jn+m = −m Jn+m ,
                             2 k∈Z

where by virtue of Proposition 4.4, the sums over k again have only finitely many non-zero terms
when acting on a given correlation equivalence class of local fields.                          
                                     
Theorem 4.10. The operators LG     n n∈Z form a representation of the Virasoro algebra with cen-
tral charge c = 1, namely
                       G G                        1
                       Ln , Lm = (n − m) LGn+m + δn+m,0 n3 − n idFG .
                                                                      
                                                   12
                                                                                    k
                                                                                   ←→
Proof. Let us omit the G superscript. To compute [Ln , Lm ], write Lm = 12 k∈Z (Jm−k Jk ), use the
                                                                          P
second formula of Lemma 4.9, and perform a change of variables ` = k + n in the first part to
obtain that
                                    k                       k                    k
                     1 X          ←→      1 X          ←→                    ←→      
        [Ln , Lm ] =       Ln , (Jm−k Jk ) =       − k(Jm−k Jn+k ) − (m − k)(Jn+m−k Jk )
                     2 k∈Z                   2 k∈Z
                                   `−n                          k
                  1X              ←−−−
                                     →        1X               ←→
                =       (n − `)(Jn+m−` J` ) +       (k − m)(Jn+m−k Jk )
                  2 `∈Z                       2 k∈Z
                = (n − m) Ln+m + An,m ,
where
                                                   `−n             `
                                 1X            ←−  −−
                                                     →            ←→      
                         An,m :=       (n − `) (Jn+m−` J` ) − (Jn+m−` J` ) .
                                 2 `∈Z
Now note that by Proposition 4.5 we get
                                                   
                          `−n             `        ` δn+m,0
                                                                 if 0 ≤ ` < n
                         ←−−−
                            →            ←→
                      (Jn+m−` J` ) − (Jn+m−` J` ) = −` δn+m,0     if n ≤ ` < 0
                                                   
                                                   0             otherwise.
                     DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                     30
                                  Pn              1   3
Observing furthermore that         `=0 (n − `)` = 6 (n − n) for n ≥ 0, we can therefore simplify
                                                 1 3
                                       An,m =      (n − n) δn+m,0 ,
                                                12
and conclude the proof.                                                                                   

4.2. Ising Model. The Ising model involves a number of additional difficulties. First of all,
since the fermion field is not local, its modes cannot act on local fields, and we must hence
consider modes of fermion pairs. Second, since the fermion is quasi-local with respect to spin-
antisymmetric fields, we must take half-integer power Laurent modes of it (while taking integer
modes of it when acting on spin-symmetric fields), see Definition 4.14. Third, since the fermion
pairs involve defect lines, one must be careful while choosing them and exchanging them to get
the right commutation modes.
Recall that we denote by FlocI the space of Ising local fields, FI
                                                                  null
                                                                       the subspace of null fields, and
by
                                          FI = FlocI /FI
                                                        null

the space of correlation equivalence classes of local fields of the Ising model. Note that the space
of local fields splits to a direct sum Floc      loc         loc
                                        I = FI;even ⊕ FI;odd of spin-symmetric fields (fields Oδ
which are even under global spin flip σ 7→ −σ, i.e., Oδ [−σ] = Oδ [σ]) and spin-antisymmetric
fields (fields Oδ which are odd under global spin flip, i.e., Oδ [−σ] = −Oδ [σ]). All considerations
below will be done separately for these two sectors.

4.2.1. Fermion Modes. We now define fermion Laurent mode pairs in the even and odd sector,
separately. In the even sector we use integer powers, but half-integer indices, and in the odd
sector we use half-integer powers but integer indices — this convention of indexing is due to half-
integer scaling dimension of the fermion field. As before, since lattice local fields are translation
invariant in their definition, to define a lattice local field, we only need to give the definition at
the origin.
Definition 4.11. Let O ∈ Floc
                          I;even be a spin-symmetric lattice local field. Let
                                                       1
                                           p, q ∈ Z + .
                                                       2
Set E := Dp ∪ Dq ∪ DO . Let γ, α be counterclockwise closed paths such that Int[γ] ⊃ Int[α] ⊃ E
and let λ be a choice of medial defect lines that does not cross R− ∪ E for all z, w ∈ Cm           δ \ E. We
define
                                 “ “
           γ α
                           1                                           [p− 12 ] [q− 12 ]
         Ψp Ψq O λ (0) =               O(0)   (ψ(zm )ψ(w m ))λ:zm ↔wm z        w        [dz]δ [dw]δ .
                          (2π i)2 γ α
Definition 4.12. Let O ∈ Floc
                          I;odd be a spin-antisymmetric lattice local field. Let

                                                 k, ` ∈ Z.
Set E := Dk ∪ D` ∪ DO . Let γ, α be counterclockwise closed paths such that Int[γ] ⊃ Int[γ] ⊃ E
and let λ be a choice of medial defect lines that does not cross R− ∪ E for all z, w ∈ Cm           δ \ E. We
define
                                 “ “
           γ α
                           1                                           [k− 12 ] [`− 12 ]
         Ψp Ψq O λ (0) =               O(0)  (ψ(z m )ψ(w m ))λ:zm ↔wm z        w        [dz]δ [dw]δ ,
                          (2π i)2 γ α
                              1            1
where the branches of z [k− 2 ] and w[`− 2 ] are the principal branches on C \ R− (i.e. the real part
is nonnegative on the positive real axis).
                   DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                            31




                     z zm
                                               0


             w w m




                                                                                
      Figure 4.2. The setup for the integrand of the definition of Ψγp Ψαq O λ . The
      set E is the shaded area. The contours with arrows are the integration contours
      α (inner, green) and γ (outer, blue) respectively. The marked medial vertices
      are the zm and wm that appear in the integral (respectively on the inner contour
      and on the outer contour), and on which the fermion ψ is defined. The marked
      diamond vertices are the z and w (on the inner and outer contours) on which the
      monomials are defined. An example of two pairs zm , z and wm , w is drawn here.
      The main part of the corresponding medial defect line is drawn in dashed orange
      stroke. The defect lines are chosen not to cross the branch cut on R− , marked by
      the wiggly line.


The following lemma tells us that the choices of α, γ and λ are essentially irrelevant, modulo
null fields. Similarly the choice of the branch cut on R− is irrelevant as well.
                                                            
Lemma 4.13. The following properties hold for Ψγp Ψαq O λ :

   (a) If O ∈ Floc
                I;even is a spin-symmetric local field, and λ and λ are two choices of the defect
                                                                       e
                                                      1
       lines as above, then we have for p, q ∈ Z + 2

                                 Ψγp Ψαq O λ − Ψγp Ψαq O λe ∈ Fnull
                                                       
                                                               I;even .

       The analogous property also holds for Ψγk Ψα` O λ for any spin-antisymmetric field O ∈ Floc
                                                        
                                                                                               I;odd
       and k, ` ∈ Z.
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                 32

   (b) If O ∈ Floc I;even is a spin-symmetric local field and γ, α and γ̃, α̃ are two pairs of large
       enough closed counterclockwise contours, then for any defect lines λ        e chosen for the con-
       tours γ̃, α̃, we have
                                   Ψγp Ψαq O λ − Ψγ̃p Ψα̃q O λe ∈ Fnull
                                                           
                                                                   I;even .

       The analogous property also holds for Ψγk Ψα` O λ where O ∈ Floc
                                                            
                                                                            I;odd is any spin-antisymmetric
       field and k, ` ∈ Z.
   (c) If O, Oe ∈ Floc                                                                      null
                      I;even are two spin-symmetric local fields such that O − O ∈ FI;even and γ, α
                                                                                     e
       are two large enough closed counterclockwise contours, then we have for p, q ∈ Z + 21
                                   Ψγp Ψαq O λ − Ψγp Ψαq O e ∈ Fnull
                                                           
                                                             λ     I;even .

       The analogous property also holds for Ψγk Ψα` O λ where O, O
                                                                 
                                                                               e ∈ Floc are any spin-
                                                                                      I;odd
       antisymmetric fields and k, ` ∈ Z.
Proof. To prove statements modulo null fields, one argues within correlations as in Lemma 4.2.
The independence on the choice of defect lines follows from Lemma 3.14. The rest of the proof
is similar to that of Lemma 4.2. Part (b) relies on the discrete holomorphicity of the correla-
tions involving two fermion insertions (Proposition 3.22) and and the discrete holomorphicity
of the discrete monomials (Propositions 2.1 and 2.3). For the spin-symmetric case, one fur-
thermore needs to observe the single-valuedness of the fermion around spin-symmetric fields
Proposition 3.17, whereas for the spin-antisymmetric case one uses Lemma 2.2, observing that
both the half-integer monomial and the fermion have monodromy −1 around the set E.           
This lemma again allows one to define the fermion mode pair action on the spaces FI;even and
FI;odd of Ising local fields modulo null fields.
                                                                                         1
Definition 4.14. For a spin-symmetric lattice local field O ∈ Floc I;even and p, q ∈ Z + 2 , we define
Ψp Ψq O ∈ FI;even as the correlation equivalence class
                                 Ψp Ψq O := Ψγp Ψαq O λ + Fnull
                                                     
                                                           I;even ,

which is independent of the choice of a large enough contours γ, α and defect lines λ by
Lemma 4.13(a,b). Moreover, by Lemma 4.13(c) we have that the Ψp Ψq O only depends on
the correlation equivalence class of O, so this defines operators
                                     Ψp Ψq : FI;even → FI;even .
Similarly, for a spin-antisymmetric lattice local field O ∈ Floc
                                                              I;odd and k, ` ∈ Z, we define the
correlation equivalence class Ψk Ψ` O ∈ FI;odd and obtain operators
                                      Ψk Ψ` : FI;odd → FI;odd .

The following annihilation property for the fermion modes will be important to define the Vira-
soro modes below.
Lemma 4.15. Let O ∈ Floc                      loc
                           I;even (resp. O ∈ FI;odd ) be a spin-symmetric (resp. spin-antisymmetric)
lattice local field. Then there exists K > 0 such that for any p, q ∈ Z + 21 with q ≥ K (resp.
k, ` ∈ Z with ` ≥ K), we have Ψp Ψq O = 0 ∈ FI;even (resp. Ψk Ψ` O = 0 ∈ FI;odd ).
Proof. With large but fixed contours γ, α, by Item 7 of Proposition 2.1 (respectively Item 7
of Proposition 2.3) we can choose K such that for all w on the contour and q ≥ K we have
  [q]                                                              
w = 0. It then follows directly from the definition that Ψγp Ψαq O λ = 0.                
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                33

Proposition 4.16. For p, q, k, l ∈ Z or p, q, k, l ∈ Z + 12 , we have the following anticommutation
relations:
(4.1)                                             Ψp Ψq + Ψq Ψp = δp,−q id
(4.2)                     (Ψk Ψp ) (Ψq Ψ` ) + (Ψk Ψq ) (Ψp Ψ` ) = δp,−q Ψk Ψ` .

Proof. The calculations are to be performed modulo null fields, i.e., it is sufficient to prove
equalities within correlations as in Proposition 4.5. We will indicate equalities up to null fields
by ≡.
Let O be a lattice local field. For an integer or half-integer n, set n− := n − 12 . Set E :=
D (p) ∪ D (q) ∪ D (O). Let us first prove the first identity (4.1). For Int[γ] ⊃ Int[α] ⊃ Int[γ̃] ⊃ E,
we have (omitting the defect lines λ : zm ↔ wm to lighten the notation),
                                             “ “
            γ α     α γ̃               1
                                                  O(0) (ψ(zm )ψ (wm )) z[p− ] w[q− ] [dz]δ [dw]δ
                         
          Ψp Ψq + Ψq Ψp O(0) =
                                     (2π i)2 γ α
                                              “ “
                                         1
                                   +        2       O(0) (ψ(wm )ψ(zm )) w[q− ] z[p− ] [dw]δ [dz]δ .
                                      (2π i) α γ̃
We can now use (ψ(w)ψ(z)) = − (ψ(z)ψ(w)) to rewrite the above (within correlations) as a
satellite integral as above
                        “            “                              
                     1             1
                           O(0)                               [p− ]
                                            (ψ (wm ) ψ(zm )) z [dz]δ w[q− ] [dw]δ ,
                    2π i α        2π i γ(w)
where γ(w) is a small contour with Int[γ] ⊃ {w ± δ, w ± iδ} and Int[γ] ∩ E = ∅. Now, by
Corollary 3.23, we have (within correlations)
                      “                            
                    1                                  1 X
                                             [p− ]
                             (ψ(wm )ψ(zm )) z [dz]δ ≡           wx[p− ] =: wm{p− }
                   2π i γ(w)                           4 x=±1,±i

By Property 10 of Proposition 2.1 and Property 9 of Proposition 2.3 (see also Lemma 5.17
below), we have
                                 “
                              1
                                       w[q− ] wm{p− } [dw]δ = δp,−q ,
                                                      
                             2π i α
which yields
                                Ψγp Ψαq + Ψαq Ψγ̃p O ≡ δp,−q O.
                                                    

The proof of the second identity (4.2) is similar: we have that the integrand in the definitions
Ψk Ψp Ψq Ψ` O(0) and Ψk Ψq Ψp Ψ` O(0) is
                  O(0) (ψ(ζm )ψ(zm ))ι:ζ↔z (ψ(wm )ψ (ξm ))κ:w↔ξ ζ[k− ] z[p− ] w[q− ] ξ[`− ]
where ι and κ are chosen to avoid DO and not to cross the negative real axis.
By Lemma 3.15, we can exchange the medial defect lines
                                                                             
         ψ(ζm )ψ(zm ) ι:ζ↔z ψ(wm )ψ(ξm ) κ:w↔ξ = ψ(ζm )ψ(ξm ) η:ζ↔ξ ψ(zm )ψ(wm ) λ:z↔w ,
by choosing medial defect lines η and λ that avoid DO and do not cross the negative real axis.
Now, Ψk Ψp Ψq Ψ` + Ψk Ψq Ψp Ψ` can be evaluated summing the two quadruple integrals of
                     (ψ(ζm )ψ(ξm ))η:ζ↔ξ (ψ(zm )ψ(wm ))λ:z↔w ζ[k− ] z[p− ] w[q− ] ξ[`− ]
                     DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                              34

with order of the variables z and w swapped. We obtain that the result of the second and third
integrals can be written as the same satellite integral as for the first identity, yielding the same
result. What is left is hence easily seen to be equal (up to null fields) to
                                                  δp,−q Ψk Ψ` O(0),
thus concluding the proof.                                                                         
4.2.2. Ising Virasoro Modes. For the next definition, let us introduce the notation
                                          (
                                    k
                                   ←→        AB       if k ≥ 0
                                (±AB) =
                                            −BA if k < 0.

Definition 4.17. For n ∈ Z, we define Leven
                                       n    : FI;even → FI;even and Lodd
                                                                     n : FI;odd → FI;odd by
                                                          k
                                             1 X         ←→
(4.3)                             Leven
                                   n    :=         k (±Ψn−k Ψk )
                                             2   1
                                              k∈Z+ 2
                                                          k
                                             1X          ←→         1
(4.4)                             Lodd
                                   n   :=          k (±Ψn−k Ψk ) +    δn,0 id.
                                             2 k∈Z                 16

Remark 4.18. By virtue of Lemma 4.15, the sums above are well-defined as operators on the
spaces FI;even and FI;odd of lattice local fields: there are only finitely many non-null terms, when
the sums act on (the correlation equivalence class of) any given lattice local field.
Remark 4.19. Using Lemma 4.20 below, the above definitions can easily be checked to equiva-
lently give the following commonly used formulas involving normal orderings
                               ( P
                                1                  1
                                                     
                          even  2    k∈Z+ 12 k + 2 : Ψn−k Ψk :    if n 6= 0
                        Ln = P∞
                                   k=1 kΨ−k Ψk                    if n = 0
                               ( P
                                1              1
                                                 
                           odd  2    k∈Z k + 2 : Ψn−k Ψk :     if n 6= 0
                         Ln = 1         P∞
                                16
                                   id + k=1 kΨ−k Ψk            if n = 0
where : Ψj Ψk : is defined as Ψj Ψk if j ≤ k and as −Ψk Ψj otherwise.
Lemma 4.20. For any s ∈ Z, we have
                       k                                                      k
            X         ←→                                        X            ←→       1
                 (±Ψs−k Ψk ) = 0                       and            (±Ψs−k Ψk ) =     δs,0 id.
                                                                                      2
                k∈Z+ 21                                         k∈Z


Proof. Rewriting the sum in terms of two equal pieces and changing variables to k 0 = s − k in
one of the two, we get
                                   k                k               s−k0
                     X            ←→        1X     ←→        1X    ←−−−→
                              (±Ψs−k Ψk ) =    (±Ψs−k Ψk ) +    (±Ψk0 Ψs−k0 ).
                          k
                                              2    k
                                                                      2 k0
We conclude the asserted formulas by the following cancellations among the two pieces
                                          s−k
                                                   (
                             k
                            ←→           ←−−−→       id if s = k = 0
                       (±Ψs−k Ψk ) + (±Ψk Ψs−k ) =
                                                     0    otherwise.
The case s = k = 0 here is simply the anticommutation relation 2 Ψ0 Ψ0 = id of Proposition 4.16.
In the cases where k, s−k have the same sign, the cancellation follows from the anticommutation
                         DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                           35

relation Ψs−k Ψk + Ψk Ψs−k = 0. In the cases where k, s − k have different signs, the cancellation
                                            k
                                           ←→
follows from the definition of (±AB).                                                               

Lemma 4.21. For any n ∈ Z, if j, k ∈ Z + 21 we have

                              k                  k                        k
                 h
                      even
                             ←→ i          n   ←→                  n   ←→
                     Ln , (±Ψj Ψk ) = − j + (±Ψn+j Ψk ) −        k + (±Ψj Ψn+k ).
                                                    2               2
Also, for any n, j, k ∈ Z, we have
                           k                  k                 k
                 h
                   odd
                          ←→ i          n   ←→           n   ←→
                  Ln , (±Ψj Ψk ) = − j + (±Ψn+j Ψk ) − k + (±Ψj Ψn+k ).
                                        2                 2

                                                                              k
                                                                             ←→
Proof. It is sufficient to prove the statements without the reordering (± ·· ), since possible re-
ordering only amounts to interchanging j and k and changing signs. Moreover, the proofs of
both statements are completely similar, so we only detail the calculation for the first one. Using
Definition 4.17 and the anticommutation relations of Proposition 4.16, and the identity

 ABCD − CDAB = A(BC + CB)D − (AC + CA)BD + CA(BD + DB) − C(AD + DA)B,

we get

              i 1 X        `                        `
   h                       ←→                       ←→      
     even
    Ln , Ψj Ψk =     ` (±Ψn−` Ψ` )Ψj Ψk − Ψj Ψk (±Ψn−` Ψ` )
                 2 1
                          `∈Z+ 2

                       1 X                                                                     
                     =      ` δ`+j,0 Ψn−` Ψk − δn−`+j,0 Ψ` Ψk + δ`+k,0 Ψj Ψn−` − δn−`+k,0 Ψj Ψ`
                       2  1
                          `∈Z+ 2

                         1                                                            
                     =   (−j) Ψn−` Ψk − (n + j) Ψ` Ψk + (−k) Ψj Ψn−` − (n + k) Ψj Ψ`
                       2
                              n                 n
                     = − j+      Ψn+j Ψk − k +      Ψj Ψn+k .
                              2                  2
                                                                                                    

Theorem 4.22. The operators (Leven
                              n )n∈Z form a representation of the Virasoro algebra with
                   1
central charge c = 2 .


Proof. Using the definition of the Virasoro mode Leven
                                                  m    and Lemma 4.21, we calculate
                                                    k
                      1        X                   ←→
         [Leven even
                                          even           
           n , Lm ] =                   k Ln , (±Ψm−k Ψk )
                          2
                              k∈Z+ 12
                                               k                     k
                        −1 X           n    ←→              n    ←→      
                      =        k m − k + (±Ψn+m−k Ψk ) + k k + (±Ψm−k Ψn+k ) .
                         2  1
                                        2                     2
                                k∈Z+ 2
                   DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                            36

Performing the change of variables ` = k + n in the second part of the sum and then combining
the two parts, and using Lemma 4.20, we get
                                         k                                `−n
                   1 X            n    ←→         1 X              n   ←−−−
                                                                            →
 [Leven even
   n , Lm ] = −          k m − k + (±Ψn+m−k Ψk ) −       (` − n) ` − (±Ψn+m−` Ψ` )
                   2   1
                                  2                2   1
                                                                    2
                     k∈Z+ 2                                    `∈Z+ 2
                                            k
                 1 X            n2       ←→
             = −       km − kn +      (±Ψn+m−k Ψk ) + Bn,m
                 2  1
                                 2
                     k∈Z+ 2
                                     k
                       1 X          ←→
             = (n − m)       k (±Ψn+m−k Ψk ) + Bn,m
                       2   1
                              k∈Z+ 2

             = (n − m) Leven
                        n+m + Bn,m ,

where
                                                    `−n              `
                         1 X               n     ←−−−
                                                      →             ←→      
              Bn,m = −         (` − n) ` −     (±Ψn+m−` Ψ` ) − (±Ψn+m−` Ψ` ) .
                         2   1
                                           2
                              `∈Z+ 2

                                                        3
The theorem will be proven, if we show that Bn,m = n 24−n δn+m,0 id. Note that in the sum over `
which defines Bn,m , whenever either `, ` − n ≥ 0 or `, ` − n < 0 the two terms directly cancel.
The finitely many remaining terms are simplified using Proposition 4.16 to constant multiples
of the identity. For example for n > 0, we get
                          1 X                  n                           
                 Bn,m = −          (` − n) ` −      −Ψn+m−` Ψ` − Ψn+m−` Ψ`
                          2      1
                                               2 |            {z           }
                               `∈Z+ 2                       =−δn+m,0 id
                               0<`<n
                             1 X               n              n3 − n
                    = +             (` − n) ` −      δn+m,0 id =        δn+m,0 id.
                             2    1
                                                2                  24
                                `∈Z+ 2
                                0<`<n

The case n < 0 is similar.                                                                     
                                 
Theorem 4.23. The operators Lodd
                             n    n∈Z
                                      form a representation of the Virasoro algebra with
                   1
central charge c = 2 .

Proof. As in the proof of Theorem 4.22, we need to show that
                         odd odd                n3 − n
                         Ln , Lm − (n − m) Lodd
                                            n+m =        δn,−m id.
                                                    24
If n, m 6= 0 and n + m 6= 0, the proof that the left hand side vanishes is exactly the same as in
Theorem 4.22 (the formulas for Lodd    odd  odd
                                  n , Lm , Ln+m are the same, and moreover the anticommutation
result of Proposition 4.16, the commutation result of Lemma 4.21 and the cancellation result of
Lemma 4.20 apply in exactly the same way). If n = m = 0, the result is trivial. If either n or m
                                              1
is zero, simply observe that the extra term 16  id commutes with anything, and hence that there
is no difference.
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                               37

The only non-trivial case to check is hence n > 0 and m = −n. We calculate, using now the
second statement in Lemma 4.20,
                                         k
                       1    X          ←→
         [Lodd  odd             odd
                                                
           n , L−n ] =       k Ln , (±Ψ−n−k Ψk )
                        2 k∈Z
                                           k                    k
                        −1 X         n  ←→             n    ←→       
                    =          k − k − (±Ψ−k Ψk ) + k k + (±Ψ−n−k Ψn+k )
                         2 k∈Z        2                  2
                                          k                              `−n
                        1X           n  ←→        1X               n  ←−−−→
                    = −       k − k − (±Ψ−k Ψk ) −       (` − n) ` − (±Ψ−` Ψ` )
                        2 k∈Z        2             2 `∈Z            2
                                               k
                        1 X          n2     ←→
                    = −       − 2kn +      (±Ψ−k Ψk ) + Bn0
                        2 k∈Z         2
                                         k
                             1X         ←→        n2
                    = 2n           k (±Ψ−k Ψk ) −    id + Bn0
                             2 k∈Z                8
                                    n      n2
                    = 2n Lodd
                          0   −       id −    id + Bn0 ,
                                    8      8
where
                                                       `−n           `
                              1X                n  ←−−−→          ←→     
                    Bn0 =   −       (` − n) ` −     (±Ψ−` Ψ` ) − (±Ψ−` Ψ` )
                              2 `∈Z             2
                                 n−1
                                1X                n                    
                        = −           (` − n) ` −      − Ψ` Ψ−` − Ψ−` Ψ`
                                2 `=0             2
                             n−1
                          1 X               n       1 3
                                                          n + 3n2 + 2n id.
                                                                      
                        =        (` − n) ` −      id =
                           2 `=0             2         24
Now simplifying, we obtain the desired form of the commutator,
                                                            n3 − n
                                  [Lodd  odd        odd
                                    n , L−n ] = 2n L0   +          id.
                                                              24
                                                                                                   

We can now construct the Virasoro representation on the Ising model local fields, by putting
together the even and odd sectors treated above.
Theorem 4.24. Setting LIn := Leven                                            I
                                                                                
                                  n   ⊕ Lodd
                                          n , we have that the operators Ln n∈Z form a repre-
sentation of the Virasoro algebra with central charge c = 21 on FI , the space of Ising lattice local
fields modulo null fields.

Proof. This is immediate from Theorems 4.22 and 4.23.                                              

                            5. Discrete Complex Analysis Proofs

5.1. Integer Monomial Construction. The construction of the positive integer monomials
is quite straightforward:
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                38

Lemma 5.1. There exists a unique family of functions z [p] : Cδ ∪ Cm     → C for p ≥ 0 such that
                                                                      δ
                                                                     δ [p]
                                                                                   [p]
 [0]     [1]   −1
z ≡ 1, z = δ z, ∂δ z = pz[p]    [p−1]    [p]
                                      , 0 = 0 for all p ≥ 1, and ± 2       = ± i2δ      for all p ≥ 2.
These functions satisfy the properties 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8 of Proposition 2.1.

Proof. It is not hard to check by induction on p, using discrete integration, that the functions
 [p]      [p]
zm and z are both discrete holomorphic and satisfy the relevant symmetry properties, and
are uniquely determined by the values near 0. The convergence as δ → 0 follows by discrete
integration. The set of medial points where z [p+1] vanishes is easily shown to be the set of
neighbors of the diamond points where z [p] vanishes (and vice versa), thus showing that the set
of points where z [p] vanishes grows with p.                                                  

The construction of the negative integer monomials is quite simple, too.

Lemma 5.2. There exists a unique family of functions z [p] : Cδ ∪ Cm  δ → C for p < 0 such that
                                                ¯   [−1]           ¯    [−1]
    [p]    [p−1]
                 , 0 = 0 for all p < 0 and with ∂δ zm = 2π1{0} and ∂δ z = 2π
                    [p]
                                                                               P
∂δ z = pz                                                                    4    x∈{±1,±i} 1{xδ/2} ,
            [−1]
such that z      → 0 as z → ∞. These functions satisfy the Properties 1, 6, and 8 of Proposition
2.1.

Proof. Recall that the discrete Cauchy kernel k : Cm   δ → C with a discrete pole at 0 is the unique
function k : Cm  →  C such that  ¯δ k = 1{0} and k decays at infinity [ChSm11, Ken00] — it can be
                                 ∂
              δ
constructed as the ∂δ -derivative of the random walk potential kernel a : Cδ → R (see [LaLi10]),
                                                      [−1]
extended as zero on the dual C∗δ . The function zm is then defined as 2πk on Cm      δ . Given this,
               [−1]                          [−1]   1
                                                       P [−1]
the function z can be constructed by z           = 4 zx where the sum is over the four medial
                               
neighbors zx ∈ Cm   δ to z ∈ C δ ; it is easy to  check that they satisfy Properties 1 (symmetry)
and 6 (decay at infinity), and Property 8 (convergence) is given by standard discrete complex
analysis techniques [ChSm11]. The uniqueness for p = −1 follows from the maximum principle.
The other functions are readily determined by repeated ∂δ -differentiation, and it is elementary
to check their properties.                                                                        


5.2. Construction of Discrete Square Roots. In this subsection, we construct the discrete
            [− 1 ] [ 1 ]                                               √
analogues zm 2 , zm2 : [Cm                                √1 and z 7→
                         δ , 0] → C of the functions z 7→   z
                                                                         z that we will need
for our construction. For this, we rely on constructions introduced in [CHI15, GHP19], and
modifications thereof.
Let us denote by Ccm         c    m
                      δ := Cδ ∪ Cδ the lattice formed by the corners and midpoints of edges
of Cδ . We say that a function F : Ccm                                        c
                                       δ → C is s-holomorphic if for any c ∈ Cδ adjacent to
      m                ∗
z ∈ Cδ , v ∈ Cδ , f ∈ Cδ we have
                                         1                   
(5.1)                            F (c) =    F (z) + ν(c)F̄ (z) ,
                                         2
where ν(c) = (v − f ) / |v − f |. This requirement will be called a “projection relation”, since it
can be interpreted as stating that the value of the function
                                                      p      at a corner c is the projection of the
complex value at an adjacent midedge z to the line ν̄(c) R ⊂ C in the complex plane.
We extend the notion of s-holomorphicity to functions defined on [Ccm
                                                                   δ , 0] by defining adjacent
as adjacent and on the same sheet.
                      DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                       39




                                                           0




        Figure 5.1. The lattice of those corners whose direction is ν(c) = %. The wiggly
        line denotes the branch cut %R+ , and the corner immediately on the North-West
                   i
        of 0 is −1+
                 4
                     δ. The shaded square is Q.

5.2.1. Discrete Inverse Square Root. In this paragraph, we introduce the discrete analogue of
                 1
the function z − 2 on the medial lattice.
Lemma 5.3. Set κ := eπi/8 , and % := e−πi/4 . There exists a unique   s-holomorphic function
         cm                                                     −1+i
Kδ : [Cδ , 0] → C with −1 monodromy around 0 such that Kδ 4 δ = κ, such that Kδ (c) = 0
for all corners with ν(c) = % on %R+ and that decays at infinity.

Proof. Set Λδ := {c ∈ [Ccδ , 0] : ν(c) = %} and let Λ±δ denote the two sheets of Λδ \ %R+ . We
                     ±
construct Kδ on Λδ as ±κHδ , where Hδ (c) is the (Beurling-type) probability that a simple
                                                       i
random walk on Λδ starting from c hits the “tip” −1+ 4
                                                         δ before the slit %R+ . The function Kδ is
clearly discrete harmonic on Λδ , and also on the cut %R+ ; indeed, the value on the cut is zero
by definition, as is the average of the values of Hδ on the two sheets, since they are of opposite
sign, by symmetry. That it decays at infinity is standard. The uniqueness follows from the
maximum principle using the decay at infinity. Given this, we can then use the same strategy
as the proof of Lemma 2.14 (Section 3.2.2 and Remark 3.1) of [CHI15], to uniquely reconstruct
Kδ from values on Λδ , by enforcing a −1 mondromy around 0. 6
An important difference with the situation of [CHI15] is that there is no s-holomporphic sin-
gularity (failure of s-holomorphicity) of Kδ anywhere. Indeed, the point where the discrete
                                 i
harmonicity of Hδ fails is −1+ 4
                                   δ, which is contained within the (dual lattice) square Q of side-
length δ centered at 0. An s-holomorphic singularity occurs at a corner when two conflicting
values for a given corner are “suggested” by the two adjacent medial vertices through the projec-
tion relation (5.1). In the case of [CHI15], the singularity occurs at a corner which is outside the
square Q, and the two values suggested by the adjacent medial vertices are opposite (they come
from two sheets); in our case, thanks to the fact that branching is at the center of the square Q,
the s-holomorphicity is preserved: the two values that come naturally from both sheets do not
conflict, since the corners for which they “suggest” a value are actually different (i.e. on opposite
sheets). Note that this situation is exactly the same as in the proof of Theorem 2.20 in [CHI15]
(see in particular the paragraph before that proof); see also Remark 2.6 in [GHP19], where it is
explained that discrete holomorphicity may exist despite the failure of harmonicity.               

  6Note that compared to our paper, the lattice is rotated by 45 degrees in [CHI15], that the the lattice square
                                  √
side length is denoted there by       2 δ that the primal graph there corresponds to the dual graph.
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                 40
                            q√
                                2
Define the constant c∗ :=      π
                                  .
                                                 1
Lemma 5.4. We have that c 1√δ Kδ (z) → iz − 2 as δ → 0, uniformly for z away from 0.
                               ∗


Proof. The convergence technology of the proof of Lemma √ 2.14 in [CHI15] leads to the proof of
                  1          − 12
convergence of ϑ(δ) Kδ → iz , for a function ϑ (δ)  δ as δ → 0. But the proof of Lemma
                                                          q√
                                                             2δ
                                                                      √
5.15 of [GHP19] gives the stronger estimate that ϑ (δ) ∼        = c ∗  δ as δ → 0 (note that the
                                                         √ π
lattice square side length in those papers is denoted by 2 δ whereas lattice square side length
in our paper is δ).                                                                           
                   [− 1 ]
We can now define zm 2 on [Cm
                            δ , 0].

                           [− 1 ]
Definition 5.5. We define zm 2 on [Cm
                                    δ , 0] by symmetrizing Kδ as follows:
                                                 7
                                    [− 1 ]  1 X ikπ/4
                                                      K δ ik z .
                                                              
                                   zm 2 :=          e
                                           8ic∗ k=0
                                                 [− 1 ]
Remark 5.6. One can show that the function zm 2 is the unique function on [Cm       δ , 0] that is
discrete holomorphic on [Cmδ , 0] except
                                      √  at 0, that  decays at infinity and shares the   same 90
degree rotation symmetries as z 7→ 1/ z and is purely real on the positive axis.
                                       [− 1 ]  πi                                           πi
Lemma 5.7. We have that the values of zm 2 at e 2 k 2δ for k = 0, . . . , 7 are given by Ce− 4 k for
some constant C > 0.
Proof. This follows from a direct calculation and symmetry.                                          
5.2.2. Discrete Square Root. For the construction of the discrete square root, we rely on a
discrete√analogue of the real part of the square   √ root function (on the 45 degree-rotated and
                                              2
factor 2 scaled square lattice (δ + iδ)Z = 2% Cδ ), denoted by G[Cδ ,0] , defined in [GHP19],
following [CHI15]. It is constructed by essentially integrating the harmonic measure used to
define the discrete version of z −1/2 . In this section, we first extend G[Cδ ,0] to an s-holomorphic
function (on the medial and corner lattices of (δ + iδ)Z2 , with the same notation and conventions
as in [GHP19]), and then define our function Gδ on [Cm       δ , 0]. While there are a few differences
(e.g., the choice of the lattice), our function is otherwise very similar.
Let us start by the extension of G[Cδ ,0] to the double cover [Cδ , 0] (with the notation and 45-degree
rotated lattice of [GHP19]) into an s-holomorphic function.
Define the constant c̃∗ = 2√1 π .
Lemma 5.8. With the notation and conventions of [GHP19], the function G[Cδ ,0] defined on
  1                                                                          cm
V[C δ ,0]
          admits a unique s-holomorphic extension with −1 monodromy to V[C     δ ,0]
                                                                                     , which vanishes
        i                   1                           1√              √
on V[Cδ ,0] ∩ R+ and on V[Cδ ,0] ∩ R− . We have that c̃ δ G[Cδ ,0] (z) → z as δ → 0 uniformly on
                                                       ∗
the compact subsets of [Cδ , 0].
Proof. This follows from [GHP19]. See Definition 3.24 in Section 3.2.4 (‘Auxiliary Functions’)
for the construction, Remark 3.25 in Section 3.2.4 for the proof of s-holomorphicity, and Lemma
5.16 in Section 5.4.1 (‘Convergence of the Full-plane Observable’) for the proof of convergence.
                                         i                    1
The fact that the function vanishes on V[C δ ,0]
                                                 ∩ R+ and on V[Cδ ,0]
                                                                      ∩ R− comes directly from the
construction.                                                                                   
                       DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                             41

We can now define the function Gδ appropriate for our setup, as a 45-degree rotated version of
G[Cδ ,0] :
                                                          πi         √     7
Definition 5.9. We define Gδ : [Cm
                                 δ , 0] → C by Gδ (z) := e G[Cδ ,0] ( 2%z).
                                                          8


The most important features of Gδ are summarized in the following.
                                                                                       1−i
Proposition 5.10. The function Gδ is s-holomorphic on [Cm        δ , 0], vanishes at 4 δ, and is “dis-
crete holomorphic at 0”, i.e.,
                    δ              δ           δ               δ         
                         i0              iπ           iπ/2                i3π/2
                 Gδ e − Gδ e                 + i Gδ e        − i Gδ e             = 0.
                      2                2            2                  2
                                            √
Moreover, we have that 21/41c̃ √δ Gδ (z) → z as z → ∞ uniformly on the compact subsets of [C, 0].
                                 ∗


Proof. The vanishing of Gδ at 1−4 i δ is direct from its construction based on G[Cδ ,0] . The discrete
holomorphicity at 0 follows from this: a failure of holomorphicity at 0 would come from an
incompatibility between the opposite values coming from the different sheets at a given corner;
here, since one of the corner values is zero here, this problem is absent. The convergence follows
from Lemma 5.8.                                                                                     
                                  [1]
We are now in position to define zm2 :
                            [1]
Definition 5.11. We define zm2 on [Cm
                                    δ , 0] → C by
                                                                  7
                                        1             1
                                     z [ 2 ] :=
                                                                  X
                                                                        e−ikπ/4 Gδ ik z .
                                                                                       
                                                  8 21/4 c̃   ∗
                                                                  k=0

Lemma 5.12. Suppose a function f : [Cm
                                     δ , 0] → C has the same 90 degree rotational symmetry
      m/2
as z 7→ z        for m odd (and in particular −1 monodromy) and is “discrete holomorphic at 0”
(in the sense of Proposition 5.10). Then f vanishes at each of the medial lattice points adjacent
                     π
to 0, i.e., at 2δ ei 2 k for k = 0, 1, . . . , 7.
                                                               π      π
Proof. The assumed symmetry implies that f 2δ ei 2 k = ei 4 mk f 2δ . The vanishing of the dis-
                                                                               
       ¯
crete ∂-derivative      at 0 then amounts to
                                                                          
                   1        δ        δ iπ         i    δ iπ       δ i 3π 
             0=          f      −f e              +    f e 2 −f e 2
                   2        2         2             2    2           2
                   1           π               π          π           δ           1          δ
                        1 + ei 4 (2m+4) + ei 4 (m+2) + ei 4 (3m+6) f
                                                                  
                =                                                         =         π
                                                                                  i 4 (m+2)
                                                                                            f    .
                   2                                                  2       1−e             2
The constant in front of f 2δ above is non-zero, so we conclude that f vanishes at 2δ , and then
                                    
                                                π
also at all the points of the form 2δ ei 2 k .                                                     
                                 [ 12 ]                            m
Proposition 5.13. The function
                         √     zm is discrete holomorphic on [Cδ , 0], has the same 90 degree
                                                             π
rotation symmetry as z 7→ z, and therefore vanishes at 2δ ei 2 k for k = 0, 1, . . . , 7. Moreover,
                  [1] √
we have that √1δ zm2 → z as δ → 0, uniformly on compact subsets of [C, 0].
Proof. The symmetry is obvious by construction and the discrete holomorphicity at 0 is inherited
from that of G[Cδ ,0] . The vanishing at the medial lattice points adjacent to 0 then follows from
Lemma 5.12. The convergence follows from Proposition 5.10.                                       
  7 The square lattice used in [GHP19] is (1 + i)δ Z2 , and correspondingly the side-length of the squares is
                                                                                                                √
                                                                                                                    2δ
instead of δ, and the orientation differs by 45 degrees.
                      DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                       42

                                                                                     [− 1 ]   [1]
5.3. Half-Integer Powers. In the previous subsection, we defined the functions zm 2 and zm2 .
Provided these functions can be differentiated and integrated in the space of functions with a
                                                                     [k]      [k]
−1 monodromy around 0, they uniquely determine the functions zm and z for all k ∈ Z + 21 :
as usual, differentiating or integrating shifts the power by 1 and switches the lattice between
               
[Cm
  δ , 0] and [Cδ , 0]. The relevant 90 degree symmetries are automatically inherited from those of
 [− 1 ] [ 1 ]
zm 2 , zm2 .
Lemma 5.14. There is a unique family of functions z [p] for p ∈ Z + 12 satisfying the conditions
1–6 and 8 of Proposition 2.3.

                                                                                                         [− 12 ]
Proof. As explained above, the negative powers on [Cm      δ , 0] are obtained    by  differentiating zm
      [ 12 ]               [p]                                               [− 21 ]
and zm and interpreting 0 = 0 for all p. The decay at infinity of z                 follows from Harnack
type estimates on the derivatives of discrete holomorphic functions [LaLi10], and for p < − 12 ,
the same argument applies. The rest of the properties for p < 0 are straightforward to check.
The positive powers are obtained by integrating in the space of functions with −1 monodromy.
The discrete holomorphicity of the z [p] for all p ≥ 12 follows by induction from the next lemma. 
Lemma 5.15. We have the following (see Figure 5.2):
                                                     √√ p
                                  [1]              C    2+1
  (1) The values of the function z 2 are given by    2
                                                            x/δ for x living above one of the
                          ±1±i            C
                                             p
      four dual vertices    2
                                δ and by 2 x/δ for x living above one of the four vertices
                                                               [− 1 ]
        ±δ, ±iδ, where C is the value of the function zm 2 at 2δ .
                         [1] [3]
    (2) The functions zm2 , zm2 vanish on the four medial vertices ± 2δ , ± i2δ .
                                                                       
                         [3] [5]                                                i
    (3) The functions z 2 , z 2 vanish on the nine diamond vertices 0, ±1±
                                                                         
                                                                              2
                                                                                  δ, ±δ, ±iδ .
                                          1      [k]
    (4) In general, for half-integer k ≥ 2 , if z vanishes on a neighborhood Λ of the origin, then
         [k+1]                                                                                     [k]
        zm     vanishes on the set of medial vertices at distance 2δ from Λ , and conversely, if zm
                                                               [k+1]
        vanishes on a neighborhood Λm of the origin, then z         vanishes on the set of diamond
        vertices at distance 2δ from Λm .

                                                                        [− 1 ]
Proof. Item 1 follows from explicit computation and the definition of zm 2 . Then Lemma 5.12
gives item 2, and the rest from integration together with Lemma 5.12 again (also keeping in
mind that the choice of the antiderivative is made unique by the constraint that the monodromy
is −1).                                                                                      


5.4. Contour Integrals.
Lemma 5.16. For any k, ` ∈ Z and any large enough contour γ, we have
                                  “
                               1
                                    z [k] z [`] [dz]δ = δk+`+1 .
                              2π i γ m 

Proof. If k + ` ≤ 2, we have the following three sub-cases:
                                                    
     • If k + ` < −1, then since zm z = O |z|k+` = O |z|−2 we can take the integration
                                    [k] [`]                      

       contour to be very large, containg O (|z|) terms a show that the integral must vanish.
                   DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                               43




                z [−1/2]                               z [1/2]




                       (a) z 7→ z [−1/2]                         (b) z 7→ z [1/2]




                 z [3/2]                               z [5/2]




                           (c) z 7→ z [3/2]                      (d) z 7→ z [5/2]

      Figure 5.2. The sets of vertices of [Cm
                                             δ , 0] where discrete half-integer monomials
      vanish are illustrated by the shaded area.

     • If k + ` = −1, we can use that δ k+` z [k] z [`] → z k+` as δ → 0 and multiply by δ to
       make the discrete contour integral converge to a continuous integral, hence yielding the
       result: the discrete contour integral has the ‘right scaling’ to pass to the limit without
       renormalization.
     • If k+` = 0, 1, 2, by contour deformation it suffices to consider a contour γ which forms the
       boundary of a large square of the form [−R, R]2 . For such contours, we can use symmetry
       to show that the integral must vanish: if k + ` = 0, 2, we have z [k] z [`] = (−z)[k] (−z){`}
       and hence antipodal contributions will cancel each other (due to the integration element),
       and if k + ` = 1, we have (iz)[k] (iz)[`] = iz [k] z [`] and hence π4 symmetric contributions
       will cancel each other (due to the integration element being multiplied by i, too).
Let us now look at the case k + ` ≥ 3:
     • If k, ` ≥ 0, the functions are discrete holomorphic everywhere and we conclude readily.
     • If k = −1, then ` ≥ 4, and we can use Stokes’ formula and the fact that z [`] vanishes at
       the points where z [k] is not discrete holomorphic.
     • If k < −1, we can use integration by parts (2.3) to raise the power of z [k] while decreasing
       the power of z [`] , until we get back to the previous case.
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                        44

     • The case ` ≤ −1 is symmetric to the previous two cases.
                                                                                                            
                                                                             {`}
Lemma 5.17. If either k, ` ∈ Z or k, ` ∈ Z + 12 , denoting zm = 4                  1                xδ [`]
                                                                                     P
                                                                                     x∈{±1,±i} (z − 2 ) , then
for any large enough contour γ, we have
                                     “
                                  1
                                        z [k] z {`} [dz]δ = δk+`+1 .
                                 2π i γ  m

Proof. The proofs of the cases k + ` ≤ 2 are exactly the same as the ones of the cases k + ` ≤ 2 in
the proof of Lemma 5.16, even if k, ` are half-integer: all that is used is the decay at infinity and
the 90 degree symmetries. Let us now look at the cases k + ` ≥ 3, and show that the integral
vanishes. We cover this in three separate cases:
     • If k ≥ 1 and ` ≥ 0, to show that the integral vanishes, we distinguish the integer and
       half-integer cases.
                                                                         [k]      {`}
          – For integer k, ` this is straightforward: the functions z and zm are discrete holo-
            morphic everywhere, and hence the contour integral vanishes.
          – For half-integer k, `, we have that
                    [k]                                   i
                ∗ z vanishes (at least) on 0, ±1±
                                               
                                                       2
                                                            δ, ±δ, ±iδ and is discrete holomorphic ev-
                                          3
                  erywhere (since k ≥ 2 )
                    {`}
                ∗ zm is (at least) discrete holomorphic outside of the nine diamond vertices
                   ±1±i                                                                            [`]
                    0, 2 δ, ±δ, ±iδ : this is inherited from the properties of the function z ,
                  shifted by a lattice spacing.
            We can hence deduce that
                                          X
                                                z {`} ∂¯δ z [k] = 0
                                                        m        
                                           [ ]
                                       zm ∈ Cm
                                             δ ,0
                                           X
                                                       z[k] ∂¯δ zm{`} = 0
                                        z ∈[Cδ ,0]

            and conclude that the contour integral vanishes.
     • If k < 1, we again distinguish the integer and half-integer cases.
          – For integer k, ` with k + ` ≥ 3 there are three cases:
                ∗ If k, ` ≥ 0, then the vanishing of the contour integral is clear by discrete
                                        [k]      {`}
                  holomorphicity of z and zm .
                                                                                 {`}
                ∗ For k = −1 and k = −2 and any ` ≥ 3 − k we have that zm vanishes on each
                                                     [k]
                  of the medial vertices where ∂¯δ z is non-zero, so the vanishing of the contour
                  integral follows from Stokes’ formula.
                ∗ For k < −2 we can integrate by parts an even number of times to reduce to
                  the previous case.
          – For half-integer k, `, we can use two integrations by parts (on a large enough contour,
                           [k]     {`}
            where both z at zm are discrete holomorphic) to raise the power of k by 2 units
            while decreasing the power of ` by 2 units, keeping k + ` constant and ` ≥ 0 until
            k ≥ 1, and reduce this case to the previous one (the reason we use two integrations
                                                                           [k+2]                   [k]
            by parts is to keep the functions on the same lattices: ∂δ ∂δ z      = (k + 2)(k + 1)z
                       {`+2}                   {`}
            and ∂δ ∂δ zm      = (` + 2)(` + 1)zm ).
     • The ` < 1 case is symmetric to the previous one.
                      DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                         45

                                                                                                               
5.5. Proof of Propositions 2.1 and 2.3. We are now in position to conclude the proofs of
the two key propositions about integer and half-integer monomials.
Proof of Proposition 2.1. Properties 1–8 were proven in Lemmas 5.1 and 5.2. Property 9 follows
from Lemma 5.16 and Property 10 follows from Lemma 5.17.                                    
Proof of Proposition 2.3. Properties 1–6 and 8 follow from Lemma 5.14. Property 7 follows from
5.15. Property 10 follows from Lemma 5.17 and the proof of Property 9 is similar but easier. 

                                     6. Lattice Fermion Proofs
In this section, we give the proofs of the key properties of the fermions stated in Section 3.3.
6.1. Fermions as Parafermions. In this subsection, we review the low-temperature expansion
of the Ising fermion, which yields to the family of parafermionic observables (see [Smi10b] for
instance). This representation is useful to reveal a number of symmetries (it is more canonical in
some sense, as it does not depend on a choice of defect line) and it is decisive for the boundary
value problem analysis of Ising correlations (see [CHI15, HoSm13, Hon10] for instance).
Definition 6.1. Let C Ωδ denote the set of even subgraphs8 of the dual graph Ω∗δ , i.e., subsets
ϑ of edges of Ω∗δ such that every dual vertex p ∈ Ω∗δ is incident to an even number of edges
of ϑ. For the Ising model with + boundary conditions on Ωδ , spin configurations σ ∈ {±1}Ωδ
bijectively correspond with even subgraphs ϑ ∈ C Ωδ of the dual graph Ω∗δ by the condition that
edges of Qϑ separate spins with opposite values. For V ⊂ Ωδ , we denote by σϑV the value of the
product x∈V σx of spins in V in the spin configuration σ corresponding to ϑ.
Remark 6.2. The Boltzmann weight e−βH[σ] of a spin configuration σ is proportional to e−2β|ϑ| ,
where |ϑ| is the number of edges in the corresponding even subgraph ϑ. It follows that we have
                                 "       #
                                   Y          1 X −2β|ϑ| V
                               E       σx =          e     σϑ ,
                                   x∈V
                                              Z    Ω     ϑ∈C     δ

where                                                 X
                                              Z :=            e−2β|ϑ| .
                                                     ϑ∈C Ωδ

Let λc1 ,c2 be a corner defect line in Ωδ and, denoting the symmetric difference by ⊕, set
                                                n                     o
                                   CcΩ1 ,cδ 2 := λc1 ,c2 ⊕ ϑ ϑ ∈ C Ωδ
which only depends on c1 and c2 , and not on the defect line λc1 ,c2 . An element γ ∈ CcΩ1 ,cδ 2 will
be called a (c1 , c2 )-subgraph: it has an even number of edges or corner ends adjacent to every
dual vertex, but has one corner end adjacent to both of the the marked corners c1 and c2 . For
γ ∈ CcΩ1 ,cδ 2 , we denote (by a slight abuse of notation) by W (γ) ∈ R/4πZ the winding of the
path in γ which goes from c1 to c2 , as defined in, e.g., [HoSm13]: if γ is a simple path, W (γ)
is defined as in Section 3.3.2, and if ‘ambiguities’ arise (i.e. going from c1 to c2 , one has three
choices about how to continue the path, left, right or straight) one either turns right or left, but
  8 Informally, an even subgraph ϑ of Ω∗ forms a collection of loops on the dual graph. Even subgraphs are also
                                         δ
called contours in the literature, but we have chosen to avoid this term because it is already used in the context
of discrete integrals.
                      DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                46

does not go straight, and W (γ) modulo 4π is independent of the choice of the path in γ, as
shown in Lemma 1.4 of [HoSm13]. We use the convention that the length |γ| of γ ∈ CcΩ1 ,cδ 2 counts
only the edges on the dual lattice Ω∗δ and not the two corner ends connecting dual vertices to
the corners c1 , c2 .
The following lemma connects the two-fermion correlations with the observables of [Hon10,
HoSm13, CHI15]. Recall that for a corner c ∈ Ccδ adjacent to vertex x ∈ Cδ and dual vertex p ∈
                       x−p
C∗δ we denote ν(c) := |x−p| .

Lemma 6.3. Consider the Ising model on a discrete domain Ωδ with + boundary conditions.
For any corners c1 , c2 , we have
                                                  1 X − i W(γ) −2β|γ|
                            E[ψc1 ψc2 ] = −ν(c1 )      e 2    e       .
                                                  Z  Ω
                                                         γ∈Cc1δ,c2


Proof. Pick a disorder line % between the dual vertices p1 and p2 adjacent to corners c1 and
c2 , respectively. Represent any Ising configuration σ ∈ {±1}Ωδ by the following collection γ of
dual-edges: for any edge e = xy of Ωδ , its dual edge e∗ belongs to γ either if e∗ ∈   / % and σx 6= σy
        ∗                                     9
or if e ∈ % and σx = σy (see Figure 6.1). It is elementary to check that the effective Boltzmann
weight e−βH[σ]−2βE% [σ] of a spin configuration σ in the presence of the disorder line % is proportional
to e−2β|γ| (with the same proportionality factor as in Remark 6.2). Letting x1 , x2 ∈ Ωδ be the
vertices adjacent to c1 , c2 , it is again elementary to check that the value of σx1 σx2 is determined
                     i            i
by γ and equals e− 2 W(γ) /e− 2 W(%) . The proof follows readily.                                     

The above lemma generalizes to multiple spin insertions, if this time we keep track of the defect
line.
Lemma 6.4. Consider the Ising model on a discrete domain Ωδ with + boundary conditions.
Let V ⊂ Ωδ . For any corners c1 , c2 , we have
                 "        !             #
                    Y                            1 X − i W(γ) −2β|γ| V
(6.1)          E        σx (ψc1 ψc2 )λ = −ν(c1 )      e 2    e      σγ⊕λ .
                    x∈V
                                                 Z  Ω
                                                               γ∈Cc1δ,c2


Proof. The proof is very similar to that of Lemma 6.3: we define the same contour γ to describe
the configuration. The only additional thing to check is that, denoting as before x1 , x2 the vertices
                                                         i
                                                      e− 2 W(γ) V
                              Q        
adjacent to c1 , c2 , we have   v∈V σx   σx 1 σ x 2 =    i      σγ⊕λ . This can be done by induction on
                                                      e− 2 W(λ)
the number of vertices in V .                                                                         

6.2. Discrete Holomorphicity. In this subsection, we give the proof of Proposition 3.22,
which is central to the lattice Virasoro construction.
The proposition concerns the discrete holomorphicity and singularities of a certain function H.
We first prove intermediate results about two related functions, defined as follows. Consider the
critical Ising model on a domain Ωδ with arbitrary boundary conditions. The following will be
fixed throughout below:
     • Let W ⊂ V ⊂ Ωδ be two subsets of vertices, and assume that V is connected.

  9In other words, γ represents the ‘frustrated pairs’ of adjacent spins
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                              47




       Figure 6.1. Spin configuration with disorder (top picture) and the associated γ
       configuration (bottom picture)

      • Let c1 ∈ [Ωcδ , V ] be a corner on the double cover of Ωδ ramified around V , whose base
        point c1 ∈ Ωcδ on the original lattice is not adjacent to V . Denote the adjacent vertex and
        dual vertex to the base point corner c1 by v1 ∈ Ωδ and p1 ∈ Ω∗δ . We will also occasionally
        denote by c∗1 ∈ [Ωcδ , V ] the corner with the same base point c1 but on the opposite sheet
        of the double cover.
but
We define a function
                                    H c : [Ωcδ , V ] \ {c1 , c∗1 } → C
                     DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                  48

on the corners of the double cover graph by the following formula: for c2 ∈ [Ωcδ , V ] \ {c1 , c∗1 } set
                                                    "      !       #
                                                      Y
                           c         c
(6.2)                    H (c2 ) = H (c1 ; c2 ) := E     σu ψc1 ψc2 .
                                                             u∈W

The fact that this is well defined on the double cover is a consequence of Proposition 3.17. In
concrete terms, if v2 ∈ Ωδ and p2 ∈ Ω∗δ are the vertex and dual vertex adjacent to the base point
c2 , this definition can be unraveled to the form
                                             "        !                   #
                                                 Y
                           c
                         H (c2 ) = − ν(c1 ) E       σu σv1 σv2 (µp1 µp2 )% ,
                                                    u∈W

where the disorder line % is chosen so that its lift to the double cover connects c1 to c2 (when
                                                                                          −p1
augmented by the two corner ends), and where as in Section 3.3.2 we denote ν(c1 ) = |vv11 −p 1|
                                                                                                .
We define a related function
                                           H m : [Ωm
                                                   δ ,V ] → C

on the medial lattice by the following formula: for z ∈ [Ωm
                                                          δ , V ] we set
                                                       "           !      #
                                              1 X          Y
(6.3)               H m (z) = H m (c1 ; z) :=         E         σu ψc1 ψzx ,
                                              2           u∈W
                                                  x∈{±1±i}

where zx := z + 4δ x ∈ [Ωcδ , V ] denotes a corner adjacent to the medial vertex z, in the direction
specified by x, and in the case zx = c1 (resp. zx = c∗1 ), we interpret ψc1 ψzx = |z−w|  z−w
                                                                                              (resp.
ψc1 ψzx = − |z−w| ) where w is the other medial edge besides z, which is adjacent to c1 (resp. c∗1 ).
             z−w


Lemma 6.5. Let z be a medial vertex of the double cover [Ωm          δ , V ]. If z is not adjacent to the
              ∗                     ∗
corners c1 , c1 , i.e., zx 6= c1 , c1 for each x ∈ {±1 ± i}, then we have
(6.4)                        H c (zx ) + H c (z−x ) = H c (zix ) + H c (z−ix ) .
If zx = c1 for some x ∈ {±1 ± i}, and w ∈ [Ωmδ , V ] is the other medial edge adjacent to c1 , then
we have
                              "       #
                      z−w       Y
(6.5)                        E      σx + H c (z−x ) = H c (zix ) + H c (z−ix ) .
                     |z − w|    x∈V

in

Proof. Let us first assume that we have + boundary conditions. Let e be the dual edge whose
midpoint is z and for each x ∈ {±1 ± i}, let ex denote the corner end between zx and a dual
vertex adjacent to z.
Let us first assume that zx 6= c1 , c∗1 for all x. Let us write the values of H c (zx ) in terms of the
low-temperature expansion (Lemma 6.4), choosing defect lines λx : c1 ↔ zx which differ only
locally, and let Cx := Cc1 ,zx denote the relevant sets of (c1 , zx )-subgraphs. Let Wx denote the
           i                                            √
weight e− 2 W(γx ) α|γx | σγVx ⊕λx , where α = e−2βcr. = 2 − 1.
The (c1 , zx )-subgraphs γx ∈ Cx for different x can be put in bijective correspondence (see
Figure 6.2): the map Cx → C−x can be defined by taking the symmetric difference γx 7→
γx ⊕ ex ⊕ e−x ⊕ e, for instance, and if Cx and Cix , the bijection share the same dual vertex,
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                  49




       Figure 6.2. Bijective correspondence between the contour sets corresponding to
       the corners around a medial vertex, and relative weights of the configuration.

γx 7→ γx ⊕ ex ⊕ eix . It is elementary to check that for any (γx , γix , γ−x , γ−ix ) thus put in corre-
spondence, we have
                                      Wx + W−x = Wix + W−ix .
Summing over all contours, we obtain (6.4), as desired.
If zx = c1 for some  x ∈ {±1   ± i}, then H c (zx ) is not defined. However, if we would set H c (zx )
          z−w
                Q         
equal to |z−w| E x∈V σx (this choice is one of the two “conflicting values” addressed below the
proof), and represent the latter in terms of even subgraphs in Cx = C (there is no path in such
even subgraphs, just loops), the bijective correspondence works in exactly the same way as above
(see Figure 6.3). This hence yields (6.5).
For more general boundary conditions, simply notice that they can be implemented by (a linear
combination of) spin insertions on the boundary, and hence can be included in V .                     
In the proof we temporarily used a certain value of the function H c also at the special corner c1 .
However, the value depended on which of the two medial edges z adjacent to c1 was under
consideration — the other adjacent medial edge would have required us to use the opposite
value. These “conflicting values” are the source of the singularity of our discrete holomorphic
function.
                       DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                         50




        Figure 6.3. Source of the discrete singularity when z is near the point c1 : per-
        forming the bijection as before, we obtain two ‘conflicting’ values of W (γ) = −π
        (top) and W (γ) = π (bottom) on the last column.




        Figure 6.4. The directions of the lines ` (c1 , c2 ) in C on which H c (c2 ) lives, for
        the four corners around a primal vertex.

The following lemma, combined with the previous one (Lemma 6.5), allows one to say that (at
criticality) the values of the function H c that appear in Equation (6.4) are actually the projection
of an extension H m of H c to the medial vertices (as will Lemma 6.7 below show): indeed the
values given by opposite corners around a medial vertex live on orthogonal lines of the complex
plane (see [Smi10a] for a reference about such considerations).
As usual, we set λ := eπi/4 .
Lemma
 p         6.6. For any c2 ∈ [Ωcδ , V ] \ {c1 , c∗1 }, we have that H c (c2 ) ∈ ` (c1 , c2 ), where ` (c1 , c2 ) :=
i ν̄(c1 )ν̄(c2 )R (see Figure 6.4).

Proof. This is elementary from the definition of H c and of the corner fermion pair (ψc1 ψc2 ). 
We are now in position to state the following discrete holomorphicity lemma for H m . Set
λ := eπi/4 and η := eπi/8 as usual.
Lemma 6.7. If ζ ∈ [Ωδ , V ] is away from V , ∂Ωδ , and c1 , c∗1 then √
                                                                      we have ∂¯δ H m (ζ)
                                                                                       = 0. If ζ is
                                                        ¯   m
                                                                          Q
the vertex or the dual vertex next to c1 , then we have ∂δ H (ζ) = 2 E             σx . x∈W

Proof. Consider a medial edge z and the corners zx adjacent to it, for x ∈ {±1 ± i}. If z is not
adjacent to c1 , c∗1 , then by Lemmas 6.5 and 6.6, we have that the values of H c (zx ) at these corners
                    DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                 51

are given by the projections of the value of H m (z) on certain lines. The line `(c1 , zx ) = ξc1 ,zx R
is specified by a complex number ξc1 ,zx of unit modulus as in Figure 6.4, and the projection
relation explicitly reads

                        c
                                              m
                                                  1 m        2
                                                                           
(6.6)                H (zx ) = pr`(c1 ,zx ) H (z) =                    m
                                                      H (z) + ξc1 ,zx H (z) .
                                                    2
When zx = c1 , then the corresponding projection relation holds with one of the two opposite
“conflicting values” for ψc1 ψc1 .
Let
 Qus consider
              the case when ν(c1 ) = λ in detail; the other cases are symmetric. Set Ξ :=
E x∈W σx . We have the following four cases:

   (1) If ζ is a primal vertex away from c1 , c∗1 , denoting by E, N, W, S the values of H m at the
       four medial vertices next to ζ in the directions 1, i, −1, −i, the projection relations (6.6)
       read:

                                        N − iN̄ = E − iĒ
                                             S + S̄ = E + Ē
                                             S + iS̄ = W + iW̄
                                         N − N̄ = W − W̄ .

       By taking an appropriate linear combination of the four equations to eliminate the com-
       plex conjugate values, one gets E − W + i (N − S) = 0, which shows ∂¯δ H m (ζ) = 0 as
       desired.
   (2) If ζ = v1 is the primal vertex adjacent to c1 , plugging in the two “conflicting” values
       given by Equation (6.5) of Lemma 6.5 (and reading them as projection relations again),
       and using the same notation as in the previous item, one gets

                                             S + iS̄ = 2λ Ξ
                                             −2λ Ξ = W + iW̄
                                             S + S̄ = E + Ē
                                        N − iN̄ = E − iĒ
                                         N − N̄ = W − W̄ .

       By again taking an appropriate
                               √          linear combination√of these five equations, one gets
       E − W + i (N − S) = 2 2 Ξ and hence ∂¯δ H m (v1 ) = 2 Ξ, as desired.
   (3) If ζ is a dual vertex away from c1 , c∗1 , and if we denote by E, N , W, S the values of H m
       at the medial vertices around ζ directions 1, i, −1, −i, the projection relations (6.6) read

                                         N + N̄ = W + W̄
                                             S − iS̄ = W − iW̄
                                             S − S̄ = E − Ē
                                        N + iN̄ = E + iĒ.

        As in the first item, an appropriate linear combination of these yields ∂¯δ H m (ζ) = 0.
                      DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                   52

   (4) Finally, if ζ = p1 is the dual vertex adjacent to c1 , using the same notation as in the
       previous item, one gets
                                              2λ Ξ = E + iĒ
                                          N + iN̄ = −2λ Ξ
                                           N + N̄ = W + W̄
                                            S − iS̄ = W − iW̄
                                            S − S̄ = E − Ē,
                                           √
          and one concludes ∂¯δ H m (p1 ) = 2 Ξ as in the second item.
                                                                                                         
The function
                                         H : [Ωm
                                               δ ,V ] → C
considered in Proposition 3.22 is straightforwardly reconstructed from H m . For its definition,
c1 is no longer fixed, but we average over the four corners c1 next to a fixed medial vertex
w ∈ [Cmδ , V ]. The function H is defined as
                                          "          !        #
                                              Y
                      H(z) = H(w; z) :=E          σu ψ(w)ψ(z)
                                                 u∈W
                                                           "       !        #
                                            π      X         Y
                                          = √             E      σu ψwy ψzx
                                           8 2 x,y∈{±1±i}    u∈W
                                 π
Up to a multiplicative constant 4√ 2
                                     , this is just the sum of H m (z) = H m (c1 ; z) over the four
corners c1 = wy adjacent to w. We now recall and prove Proposition 3.22 concerning the
function H.
Proposition (Proposition 3.22). For ζ ∈ [Ωδ , V ] away from ∂Ωδ , V , we have ∂¯δ H(ζ) = 0 if
ζ 6∼ w, w∗ and we have                            "        #
                                            π       Y
                                 ∂¯δ H(ζ) = E           σx
                                            2       x∈W
if ζ ∼ w.
Proof of Proposition 3.22. This property of H follows directly from Lemma 6.7 about H m .                

                                              References
[Bax89]  R. Baxter, Exactly solved models in statistical mechanics. Academic Press Inc., Harcourt Brace Jo-
         vanovich Publishers, London, 1989.
[BaBe03] M. Bauer and D. Bernard, Conformal Field Theories of Stochastic Loewner Evolutions. Comm. Math.
         Phys. 239:493–521, 2003.
[BPZ84a] A. A. Belavin, A. M. Polyakov and A. B. Zamolodchikov. Infinite conformal symmetry in two-
         dimensional quantum field theory, Nucl. Phys. B, 241(2):333–380, 1984.
[BPZ84b] A. A. Belavin, A. M. Polyakov and A. B. Zamolodchikov. Infinite conformal symmetry of critical
         fluctuations in two dimensions, J. Stat. Phys., 34(5-6):763–774, 1984.
[BeHo17] S. Benoist, C. Hongler, in preparation.
[Bor86] R. E. Borcherds, Vertex algebras, Kac-Moody algebras, and the Monster, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
         83:3068–3071, 1986.
[Car84] J. Cardy, Conformal invariance and Surface Critical Behavior. Nucl. Phys. B 240:514–532, 1984.
                      DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                       53

[Car13] J. Cardy, The Legacy of Ken Wilson, J. Stat. Mech. P10002, 2013.
[CCK17] D. Chelkak, D. Cimasoni, A. Kassel. Revisiting the combinatorics of the 2D Ising model. Ann. Inst.
         Henri Poincaré (D) 4(3), pp. 309–385, 2017.
[CGS16] D. Chelkak, A. Glazman, S. Smirnov. Discrete stress-energy tensor in the loop O(n) model. https:
         //arxiv.org/abs/1604.06339.
[CHI15] D. Chelkak, C. Hongler and K. Izyurov, Conformal invariance of spin correlations in the planar Ising
         model, Annals of Math., 181(3):1087–1138, 2015.
[CHI19] D. Chelkak, C. Hongler and K. Izyurov, in preparation.
[ChSm11] D. Chelkak and S. Smirnov, Discrete complex analysis on isoradial graphs. Advances in Mathematics,
         228:1590–1630, 2011.
[ChSm12] D. Chelkak, S. Smirnov, Universality in the 2D Ising model and conformal invariance of fermionic
         observables, Invent math., 189(3):515–580, 2012.
[DMS97] P. Di Francesco, P. Mathieu and D. Sénéchal, Conformal Field Theory. Graduate texts in contemporary
         physics. Springer-Verlag New York, 1997.
[Dor90] P.E. Dorey, The exact s-matrices of affine toda field theories, Doctoral thesis, Durham University, 1990
[DoFa84] V. S. Dotsenko and V. A. Fateev. Conformal algebra and multipoint correlation functions in 2D sta-
         tistical models. Nucl. Phys., B240(3):312–348, 1984.
[Doy13] B. Doyon, Conformal loop ensembles and the stress-energy tensor, Lett. Math. Phys. 103:233-284, 2013.
[DRV06] B. Doyon, V. Riva and J. Cardy, Identification of the stress-energy tensor through conformal restriction
         in SLE and related processes. Comm. Math. Phys.,268:687–716, 2006.
[Dub11a] Topics on abelian spin models and related problems, Probab. Surveys, 8:374–402, 2011.
[Dub15a] J. Dubédat, Dimers and families of Cauchy-Riemann operators I, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 28:1063–1167,
         2015.
[Dub11b] J. Dubédat, Exact bosonization of the Ising model, arXiv:1112.4399v1
[Dub15b] J. Dubédat, SLE and Virasoro Representations: Localization, Comm. Math. Phys., 336(2):695–760,
         2015.
[Dub15c] J. Dubédat, SLE and Virasoro Representations: Fusion, Comm. Math. Phys., 336(2):761–809, 2015.
[FaGa93] P. Falceto and K. Gawedzki, Lattice Wess-Zumino-Witten model and quantum groups, J. of Geom.
         and Phys. 11:251–279, 1993.
[Fel89]  G. Felder. BRST approach to minimal models. Nucl. Phys. B, 317(1):215–236, 1989. Erratum ibid.
         317 (1989), no. 1, 215–236.
[FlKl15] S.M. Flores and P. Kleban, A Solution Space for a System of Null-State Partial Differential Equations,
         Parts 1, 2, 3, 4, Comm. Math. Phys. 333(1):389–434, 333(1):435–381, 333(2):597–667, 333(2):669–715,
         2015.
[FrSu78] E. Fradkin, L. Susskind, Order and disorder in gauge systems and magnets, Phys. Rev. D,
         17(10):2637–2658.
[FLM88] I. B. Frenkel, J. Lepowsky, and A. Meurman, Vertex Operator Algebras and the Monster, Academic
         Press, 1988.
[FrWe03] R. Friedrich, W. Werner, Conformal restriction, highest-weight representations and SLE, Comm. Math.
         Phys. 243:105–122, 2003.
[GJRSV13] A. M. Gainutdinov, J. L. Jacobsen, N. Read, H. Saleur, and R. Vasseur, J. Phys. A 46(49), 2013.
[Gaw99] K. Gawȩdzki, Lectures on conformal field theory. In Quantum fields and strings: A course for mathe-
         maticians, (Princeton, NJ, 1996/1997) Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, , 2:727–805. 1999.
[GHP19] R. Gheissari, C. Hongler, S. Park, Ising Model: Local Spin Correlations and Conformal Invariance, ,
         Comm. Math. Phys., 367(3):771–833, 2019.
[GlHo17] A. Glazman, C. Hongler, in preparation.
[GJ87]   J. Glimm, A. Jaffe. Quantum physics: A functional integral point of view. Springer- Verlag, New York,
         second edition, 1987.
[GKO85] P. Goddard, A. Kent and D. Olive, Virasoro algebra and coset space models, Phys. Lett. B 152(1-
         2):88–92, 1985.
[Hon10] C. Hongler, Conformal Invariance of Ising Model Correlations, Ph.D. thesis, Université de GenÃšve,
         https://archive-ouverte.unige.ch/unige:18163, 2010.
[Hon12] C. Hongler. Conformal Invariance of Ising model Correlations, XVIIth International Congress on Math-
         ematical Physics, Aalborg, 2012.
                       DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                          54

[HKZ14] C. Hongler, K. Kytölä and A. Zahabi, Discrete Holomorphicity and Ising model Operator Formalism.
         Analysis, Complex Geometry, and Mathematical Physics : A Conference in Honor of Duong H. Phong,
         Columbia, NYC, USA, 2014.
[HoSm13] C. Hongler and S. Smirnov, The energy density in the planar Ising model, Acta Math., 211:191–225,
         2013.
[ItTh87] H. Itoyama, H.B. Thacker, Lattice Virasoro algebra and corner transfer matrices in the Baxter eight-
         vertex model. Phys. Rev. Lett. 58: 1395–1398, 1987.
[Kac82] V. Kac, Infinite dimensional Lie algebras, Birkhäuser Boston, 1982.
[KaCe71] L. Kadanoff and H. Ceva, Determination of an operator algebra for the two-dimensional Ising model.
         Phys. Rev. B (3), 3:3918–3939, 1971.
[KaMa11] N.G. Kang, N. Makarov, Gaussian free field and conformal field theory, Astérisque, 2013.
[Ken00] R. Kenyon, Conformal invariance of domino tiling. Ann. Probab., 28:759-795, 2000.
[Ken01] R . Kenyon, the Laplacian and Dirac operators on critical planar graphs. Invent. Math. 150:409–439,
         2002.
[KnZa84] V.G. Knizhnik and A.B. Zamolodchikov, Current algebra and Wess–Zumino model in two dimensions,
         Nucl. Phys. B, 247:63–103, 1984.
[KoSa94] W.M. Koo, H. Saleur, Representations of the Virasoro algebra from lattice models, Nucl. Phys.
         B426:459--504, 1994.
[KRV15] A. Kupiainen, R. Rhodes and V. Vargas, Conformal Ward and BPZ Identities for Liouville quantum
         field theory, arXiv:1512.01802v2.
[Kyt07] K. Kytölä, Virasoro module structure of local martingales of SLE variants, Rev. Math. Phys. 19, 455,
         2007.
[LaLi10] G. F. Lawler, V. Limic. Random Walk: A Modern Introduction. Cambridge Univ. Press, 2010.
[Mer01] C. Mercat, Discrete Riemann surfaces and the Ising model. Comm. Math. Phys. 218:177–216, 2001.
[Mic89] J. Mickelsson, Current Algebras and Groups, Plenum Monographs in Nonlinear Physics, Springer,
         1989.
[Miy04] M. Miyamoto, A new construction of the moonshine vertex operator algebra over the real number field,
         Annals of Math., 159:535–596, 2004.
[Mus09] G. Mussardo, Statistical Field Theory: An Introduction to Exactly Solved Models in Statistical Physics,
         Oxford University Press, 2009.
[Pal07] J. Palmer, Planar Ising correlations. Birkhäuser, 2007.
[Pol70] A. Polyakov, JETP Lett. 12, 11:538–541, 1970.
[Sch00] O. Schramm, Scaling limits of loop-erased random walks and uniform spanning trees. Israel J. Math.,
         118:221–288, 2000.
[Sch07] O. Schramm. Conformally invariant scaling limits: an overview and a collection of problems. Interna-
         tional Congress of Mathematicians Vol. I, 513–54, Eur. Math. Soc., ZÃŒrich, 2007.
[Seg88] G. Segal, The definition of conformal field theory, Differential geometrical methods in theoretical physics,
         250:165–171, 1988
[Seg04] G. Segal, The definition of conformal field theory, Topology, geometry and quantum field theory, Cam-
         bridge University Press, 308:421–577, 2004.
[She07] S. Sheffield, Gaussian free fields for mathematicians. Probab. Theory Related Fields. 139:521–541, 2007.
[Smi06] S. Smirnov, Towards conformal invariance of 2D lattice models. Sanz-Solé, Marta (ed.) et al., Pro-
         ceedings of the international congress of mathematicians (ICM), Madrid, Spain, August 22–30, 2006.
         Volume II: Invited lectures, 1421-1451. ZÃŒrich: European Mathematical Society (EMS), 2006.
[Smi10a] S. Smirnov, Conformal invariance in random cluster models. I. Holomorphic fermions in the Ising
         model. Ann. Math. 172(2):1435-1467, 2010.
[Smi10b] S. Smirnov, Discrete complex analysis and probability. Proceedings of the ICM, Hyderabad, India,
         2010.
[Som68] C. Sommerfield, Currents as dynamical variables, Phys. Rev. Lett. 176:2019, 1968.
[Sug68] H. Sugawara, A field theory of currents. Phys. Rev. Lett. 170:1659, 1968.
[ThIt88] H.B. Thacker, H. Itoyama, Integrability, Conformal Symmetry and Noncritical Virasoro Algebras,
         Nucl. Phys. B 5A:9–14, 1988.
                                                                            (1)
[Wak86] M. Wakimoto, Fock Representations of the Affine Lie Algebra A1 , Comm. Math. Phys., 104:605–609,
         1986.
[WiKo74] K. Wilson and J. Kogut, Physics Reports 12C:75-200, 1974.
                      DISCRETE COMPLEX ANALYSIS AND VIRASORO STRUCTURE                                     55

[Zam89] A.B. Zamolodchikov. Integrable field theory from conformal field theory, Adv. Stud. Pure Math. 19:641,
         1989.
[ZuIt75] J.B. Zuber and C. Itzykson, Quantum Field Theory and the two-dimensional Ising model, Phys. Rev.
         D. 15(10):2875–2884, 1975.

Chair of Statistical Field Theory, Institute of Mathematics, EPFL Station 8 CH-1015 Lausanne
Switzerland
E-mail address: clement.hongler@epfl.ch

Department of Mathematics and Systems Analysis, Aalto University, P.O. Box 11100, FI-00076
Aalto, Finland
E-mail address: kalle.kytola@aalto.fi

Department of Mathematics, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, 100 44 Stockholm, Sweden
E-mail address: fredrik.viklund@math.kth.se
