                                                      Anyonic Chains – α-Induction – CFT – Defects –
                                                                        Subfactors

                                                                                      Stefan Hollands1∗
                                                                      1
                                                                        Universität Leipzig, ITP and MPI-MiS Leipzig
arXiv:2205.15243v2 [cond-mat.str-el] 24 Jun 2022




                                                                                             June 27, 2022


                                                                                                 Abstract
                                                               Given a unitary fusion category, one can define the Hilbert space of a so-called
                                                           “anyonic spin-chain” and nearest neighbor Hamiltonians providing a real-time evo-
                                                           lution. There is considerable evidence that suitable scaling limits of such systems
                                                           can lead to 1 ` 1-dimensional conformal field theories (CFTs), and in fact, can be
                                                           used potentially to construct novel classes of CFTs. Besides the Hamiltonians and
                                                           their densities, the spin chain is known to carry an algebra of symmetry operators
                                                           commuting with the Hamiltonian, and these operators have an interesting represen-
                                                           tation as matrix-product-operators (MPOs). On the other hand, fusion categories
                                                           are well-known to arise from a von Neumann algebra-subfactor pair. In this work,
                                                           we investigate some interesting consequences of such structures for the correspond-
                                                           ing anyonic spin-chain model. One of our main results is the construction of a novel
                                                           algebra of MPOs acting on a bi-partite anyonic chain. We show that this algebra is
                                                           precisely isomorphic to the defect algebra of 1`1 CFTs as constructed by Fröhlich et
                                                           al. and Bischoff et al., even though the model is defined on a finite lattice. We thus
                                                           conjecture that its central projections are associated with the irreducible vertical
                                                           (transparent) defects in the scaling limit of the model. Our results partly rely on the
                                                           observation that MPOs are closely related to the so-called “double triangle algebra”
                                                           arising in subfactor theory. In our subsequent constructions, we use insights into
                                                           the structure of the double triangle algebra by Böckenhauer et al. based on the
                                                           braided structure of the categories and on α-induction. The introductory section of
                                                           this paper to subfactors and fusion categories has the character of a review.


                                                   Contents
                                                   1 Introduction                                                                                     2
                                                     1.1 Inclusions of von Neumann algebras and anyonic chains . . . . . . . . . .                    4
                                                     1.2 Main results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             6
                                                     1.3 Summary of notations and conventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                  11
                                                      ∗
                                                          stefan.hollands@uni-leipzig.de


                                                                                                     1
2 Background                                                                                11
  2.1 Von Neumann algebras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          11
  2.2 Fusion categories, endomorphisms and intertwiner calculus . . . . . . . .             12
  2.3 Q-systems and subfactors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          18
  2.4 Relative braiding and systems of endomorphisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            21
  2.5 Jones basic construction and Jones projections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          23
  2.6 Higher relative commutants and paths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            25
  2.7 6j-symbols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      26
  2.8 Double triangle algebra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       29
  2.9 Subfactors and CFTs on 1 ` 1 Minkowski spacetime . . . . . . . . . . . .              34
  2.10 Defects for CFTs on 1 ` 1 Minkowski spacetime . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            37

3 MPOs                                                                                      38
  3.1 6j-symbols and MPOs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           38
  3.2 MPOs and double triangle algebra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          43
  3.3 Chain Hamiltonians, local operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         51

4 Defects                                                                                   54
  4.1 Defect algebra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      54
  4.2 Classification of defects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     64
  4.3 Special cases: abelian fusion in M . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        70

5 Conclusions                                                                               71

A Inclusions associated with finite groups                                                  71

B PEPs and double triangle algebra                                                          74


1    Introduction
It has been known for a long time that low dimensional quantum systems can exhibit cer-
tain excitations – so-called anyons [1] – obeying a generalization of the usual Bose-Fermi
exchange statistics. A prominent example are unitary, rational 1 ` 1-dimensional confor-
mal field theories (CFTs) and the mathematical structure emerging from the possibility
to fuse and exchange such excitations is that of a “modular tensor category” [2, 3, 4, 5]
which is a special type of “fusion category” [6]. The non-trivial exchange statistics corre-
sponds to a braiding, which brings about a connection with low dimensional topology and
topological quantum field theories. There are many different aspects and approaches to
these structures [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16], which is inevitably an incomplete list.
Anyonic excitations are, however, not intrinsically tied to conformal symmetry or even
relativistic kinematics and can be viewed more generally as states of systems exhibiting
some sort of topolgicial order, such as gapped systems without a local order parameter.
Among other things, systems of this type have been discussed as models for universal
quantum computing, see e.g. [17] and references therein.
    While modular tensor categories on the one hand can be seen as an output – or
algebraic skeleton – of certain quantum field theories, they have been used more recently


                                              2
as an input to construct certain quantum mechanical spin systems called “anyonic” spin-
chains, which may or may not have a quantum field theory as their scaling limit. Such
systems were first considered by [18, 19] and subsequently studied (see e.g. [20, 21, 22,
23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28]) with the aim to provide relatively simple quantum mechanical
systems exhibiting topological excitations that are practically built in from the start.
In an ordinary spin chain, the sites correspond to certain representations of a group
(e.g. SU p2q or Z2 ), whereas in an anyonic chain, the sites are associated with certain
objects of a fusion category. The possible ways of fusing L of these objects by subsequent
applications of the fusion rules are in one-to-one correspondence with the basis vectors
of the Hilbert space of the anyonic chain of length L, see fig. 1.


                   M0

                          a1
                    t1

                         t2        M2
                                                                               Hom ( M0 (         )k, M2k )
                                             a3
                                   t3

                                                       a2k-1

                                                      tL         M2k




                              M0        a1          M2          a3             a2k-1        M2k
                                   t1          t2          t3                          tL




                                             for periodic chain M0 = M2k



                                             | t1, t2, ... , tL >      ν   L




             Figure 1: Relation between intertwiner spaces and spin-chains.

    The Hilbert space carries an algebra of “symmetry operators”, for each simple object
of the input fusion category. These symmetry operators can be seen [29] as so-called
“matrix product operators” (MPOs) which are built from the F -symbols of the category,
and they obey an algebra that is isomorphic to the input fusion rules. The symmetry
operators commute with each term of a very natural class of nearest neighbor interaction
Hamiltonians and in this sense can broadly speaking be seen as being of a “topological”
nature.
    Unitary fusion categories, the input of anyonic spin chain constructions, appear promi-
nently in the context of finite index inclusions of a factor-subfactor pair N Ă M of von
Neumann algebras, the study of which was initiated in the seminal work by Jones [30]
and subsequently elaborated by many authors using a variety of different approaches, see

                                                                       3
e.g. [31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38] as an inevitably incomplete list of references. It was
realized almost from the beginning [33, 34] (see also [37]) that the invariants of a factor-
subfactor pair allow for the construction of certain algebraic structures such as the “string
algebra” that in retrospect have a large amount of mathematical overlap with the basic
constructions related to anyonic spin chains. This connection was recently investigated
by [39, 40] who in particular eludicated the mathematical connection to the tube algebra
[41] (closely related also to the so-called Longo-Rehren inclusion [42, 43, 43]) whose role
in describing anyonic excitations had been described by [29]. Since anyonic spin chains
admit in certain cases continuum limits which are CFTs, we may call such constructions
bottom up, i.e. from subfactors and fusion categories to QFTs.

1.1        Inclusions of von Neumann algebras and anyonic chains
The passage from a factor-subfactor pair N Ă M to the physical objects associated
with an anyonic chain can roughly be described as follows. Since N is contained in
M, we have the inclusion (identity) map ı : N Ñ M. ı is of course not in general
invertible, but under the hypothesis of “finite index”, there is a kind of inverse ı̄; however
ı̄ı is not the identity map of N but instead “unitarily equivalent” to a “sum” of maps
ı̄ı – idN ‘ρ1 ‘. . . . We think of these maps ρ1 , . . . as a kind of irreducible “representation”
of N different from the defining representation idN on the given Hilbert space. In a
similar way, we also have ıı̄ – idM ‘ A1 ‘ . . . , with irreducible “representations” A1 of
M. Technically, ρ1 , . . . and A1 , . . . are *-endomorphisms of N and M, and we similarly
also have endomorphisms a1 , . . . from N to M. These decompositions are in some ways
analogous to a decomposition of a tensor product or restriction of ordinary representations
(of, say, a group). They are called “fusion”.
     Now imagine iterating this process and consider A1 ı – a2 ‘ . . . , then a2 ı̄ – A3 ‘ . . . ,
etc. In this way we obtain a fusion tree as in fig. 1 where at each node we have to make
a choice of the next sub-object to pick. Such a choice corresponds to an “intertwiner”,
                         t1 : ıı̄ Ñ A1 ,   t2 : A1 ı Ñ a2 ,   t3 : a2 ı̄ Ñ A3 ,   ....                  (1)
For example, intertwiner in the first case means that t1 ıı̄pmq “ A1 pmqt1 for all m P
M. These subsequent choices of intertwiners are considered to define an abstract ket
|t1 , t2 , . . . , tL y in a Hilbert space V L of the chain of length L (not to be confused with the
Hilbert space on which N , M act!).
      The concatenation of ti ’s defines an intertwiner looomooon
                                                              ıı̄ıı̄ . . . ıı̄ Ñ idM (taking the last object
                                                                   L
to be trivial1 ), so V L may be thought of as a space intertwiners. So, if we have any
element m of M that is also an intertwiner ıı̄ıı̄ . . . ıı̄ Ñ ıı̄ıı̄ . . . ıı̄ then by composing with
the intertwiner ıı̄ıı̄ . . . ıı̄ Ñ idM from V L , we get another element from V L , hence an m of
the sort described defines a linear operator on V L . These m’s are by their very definition
in the so-called “relative commutant”, m P M X pNL´1 q1 , where a prime denotes the set of
operators commuting with a given von Neumann algebra, and where NL´1 :“ pıı̄qL{2 pMq,
which is a von Neumann sub-algebra of M. Thus we have correspondences:
                          states in V L Ø sequences of intertwiners |t1 , . . . , tL y,
                                                                                                        (2)
                     operators on V L Ø relative commutant M X pNL´1 q1 .
   1
       This corresponds in fact to a specific boundary condition on the chain.

                                                      4
                                                                     t11   t12          t1L´1   t1L

       xt11 , . . . , t1L |MPO|t1 , . . . , tL y   “

                                                                     t1    t2           tL´1    tL

               Figure 2: Schematic diagram for matrix element of an MPO.

The sequence of inclusions NL´1 ¨ ¨ ¨ Ă N3 Ă N1 Ă M is the odd part of the “Jones
tunnel” [30] (with the even part being given by NL :“ pı̄ıqL{2 pN q, where L is assumed
even). Among many other things, Jones’ work showed that the relative commutants
M X pNL´1 q1 are finite dimensional (hence isomorphic to direct sums of matrix algebras).
By definition, they grow with increasing L, and each time we go down the tunnel by one
unit, say from Nx to Nx`1 , they include a certain additional projection ex called a “Jones
projection”, meaning that Nx`1 is generated as a von Neumann algebra by ex and Nx .
The Jones projections play a crucial role in the entire theory and Jones showed that they
satisfy a Temperly-Lieb algebra,

                           ex ex˘1 ex “ d´1 ex ,       rex , ey s “ 0 if |x ´ y| ą 1,                 (3)

where d ě 1 is the square root of the Jones index rM : N s which he showed is quantized
below d “ 2 as

               rM : N s1{2 “ d P t2 cosrπ{pk ` 2qs : k “ 1, 2, 3 . . . u Y r2, 8s.                    (4)

The Jones projections for x “ 1, . . . , L are all in the relative commutant MXpNL´1 q1 and
so can be viewed as operators on the chain Hilbert space V L . In fact, they correspond in
a sense to an action involving only neighboring sites x, x ` 1 on the chain, so it is natural
to identify
                  local operators on V L Ø Jones projections e1 , . . . , eL .            (5)
The sum of the ex is therefore a natural candidate for a local Hamiltonian,
                                                              L
                                                              ÿ
                                                   H“J            ex .                                (6)
                                                           x“1

In fact, the connection between the Temperly-Lieb algebra and anyonic Hamiltonians
has been observed and used in the literature from the beginning in special models, see
e.g. [19, 27]. There is evidence in special models that the algebra generated by the ex
can be identified with a product of left-and right moving Virasoro algebras in a suitable
conformal scaling limit of the chain, see [27, 44] which uses ideas by [45].
    The Hilbert space V L of the chain also carries certain other special operators, called
“matrix product operators” (MPO). These operators look schematically like the following
fig. 2. The circles in this chain represent certain quantum 6j-symbols (sometimes also
called F -tensors or bi-unitary connections) built from a fusion category associated with
the inclusion N Ă M and the legs are labelled by intertwiners ti (1). The value of this
concatenation of 6j-symbols is thought of as the matrix element of an MPO, as described


                                                          5
in more detail in the main text. For example, by closing the left and right horizontal
wires, we obtain the operators OA
                                L
                                  on V L defined by [29], which are shown to satisfy
                                          ÿ
                                 OAL L
                                    OB “       C
                                             NA,B OCL                                (7)
                                              C


with NA,B
       C
           the fusion tensor (i.e. NA,B
                                     C
                                        is the number of independent intertwiners AB Ñ
C).
    The reason why these – and the class of more general operators defined and investi-
gated in this paper – are called “symmetry operators” is that they commute with the local
operators on the chain, hence in particular with the Hamiltonian, thus giving us global
conservation laws. But commutation with even the local densities of the Hamiltonian is
a much stronger property, so we may call them in a certain sense “topological”, because
they are invariant if we drive the evolution forward only locally. In summary, we have
the correspondence
                           symmetry operators on V L Ø MPOs                           (8)
The elaboration of this and related ideas will be the main theme of this work.
    Jones’ work was initially in the context of special von Neumann algebras of so-called
type II1 , and the objects of the fusion category are in this case certain bimodules – the
natural notion of representation in this setting – associated with the inclusion N Ă M
[35, 36, 37]. Jones work was soon generalized to inclusions of so-called type III [46, 47],
where the invariants and fusion categories arising from the subfactor can be conveniently
approached via the notion of an endomorphism [15, 16, 48], a formalism which we also used
in the above outline. The works [15, 16] and also [9, 10] brought to light in particular the
close connection between the invariants of a factor-subfactor pair and the Doplicher-Haag-
Roberts analysis of so-called superselection sectors in quantum field theory (QFT), see e.g.
[49, 50]. From the viewpoint of QFT, an endomorphism corresponds to a representation
of the observable algebras which is equivalent to the vacuum representation except in
some subregion thought of the localization of the excitation. Since the localization can
be translated by means of local operations, one gets a notion of exchange statistics of
the excitations, which in low dimensions can be of anyonic type, thus endowing certain
categories of localized endomorphisms with the structure of a so-called modular tensor
category. Thus, one can say that low dimensional QFTs naturally provide as an output
inclusions of von Neumann factors, and the associated objects in the corresponding fusion
categories correspond to anyons. We may think of this as a top down direction because a
QFT contains a lot more structure than the output fusion category due to the presence of
local degrees of freedom – they give nets of subfactors [42] in the terminology of algebraic
QFT [50].

1.2    Main results
In this paper, we further elaborate on the relation between the top down and bottom up
connections between subfactors/fusion categories and QFTs. While our constructions do
not touch the important analytical question of proving convergence of scaling limits of
anyonic spin-chains to continuum QFTs (recently investigated in certain examples by [51,
52, 53, 27], for an alternative program see [54]), we add non-trivial observations concerning

                                             6
the close analogy between vertical defects in anyonic spin-chains and transparent defects
in 1 ` 1-dimensional rational CFTs. Our investigations crucially rely on harnessing the
powerful machinery of subfactor theory, in particular α-induction [55, 56, 57, 42] and
Ocneanu’s double triangle algebra [33, 34, 58] in the context of anyonic spin-chains and
MPOs. The main results of this paper are as follows:
Intertwiners, Jones tunnel, and anyonic chains. We first relate the Hilbert space
of an anyonic spin-chain to the Jones tunnel associated with a finite index inclusion
N Ă M of von Neumann factors and set up the basic connections between the anyonic
spin chain literature and subfactor theory such as intertwiners, F -symbols (referred to
as 6j-symbols in this paper), etc., as partly outlined in sec. 1.1. This part of the paper
is hardly original and explained from a somewhat different perspective (type II factors)
e.g. in [39, 40] which in turn partly builds on ideas of Ocneanu [33, 34], see also [37].
However, these observations are useful because we shall see how to import parts of the
powerful machinery of subfactor theory to the study of anyonic spin chains. We also
emphasize the connection with the formalism of endomorphisms and that, by contrast to
most of the literature on anyonic spin chains, the construction that is most natural from
the viewpoint of subfactor theory is to label the sites of the chains in an alternating way
by the objects ıı̄ıı̄ı . . . , as opposed to a single object see fig. 1. In simple examples of
anyonic chains the objects ı and ı̄ typically can be identified; for example in the Ising
category with objects σ, ε, id and fusion σ 2 “ id ‘ ε etc., both ı, ı̄ are identified with the
self-conjugate object σ.
    From the perspective of subfactor theory, it is not natural to work with a single fusion
category but with fusion categories N XN (objects ρ1 , . . . ) respectively M XM (objects
A1 , . . . ) associated with N respectively M, as well as the “induction-restriction” objects
which form N XM respectively M XN (objects a1 , . . . ). The objects A associated with the
symmetry operators OA         L
                                , which are typically discussed in the context of anyonic chains
and related to defects [59] are from M XM , which is in general not a braided category. By
contrast, we also have objects µ from N XN , which we assume to be a (non-degenerately)
braided category. Thus, there is an imbalance between the properties of N XN and M XM ,
which is mirrored by a corresponding imbalance, in general, between the category of
primary fields of a 1+1 dimensional CFT and the category of defects, described in more
detail below.
    It would be interesting to connect our constructions to the discussion of string-net
models in [28], where modules of (different) categories appear. In our approach, the
objects of N XM , M XN likewise may be regarded as right/left-modules and M XM as
bimodulers associated to a “Q-system” that is closely related to N XN [5], and as in our
approach, the consistency of the fusion rules and associators enforced by the module
properties plays a key role in [28]. However, in our constructions, detailed below, the
braiding and α-induction additionally play a central role and we do not see an overlap
between our central results on vertical defects, outlined in the following, and the results
by [28].
Symmetry operators and double triangle algebra. The, in general very indirect,
relationship between N XN , M XM , N XM , M XN is at least partially encoded in the double
triangle algebra [33, 34, 58]. A crucial observation for the subsequent constructions in this
paper is that there is a representation of this algebra on anyonic spin chains of arbitrary


                                               7
length L. In fact, the generators of the double triangle algebra are represented by MPOs
built from chains of 6j-symbols as in fig. 2. Representers of particular members of the
double triangle algebra yield the symmetry operators OA       L
                                                                labelled by objects A from
  X
M M    , discussed in the literature on   anyonic spin chains and in particular [29]. In fact,
our proof of the representation property uses one of the main graphical ideas by [29]
called the “zipper lemma”, which is a reflection of the pentagon identity for 6j-symbols.
    The double triangle algebra contains also other special elements of interest from the
perspective of anyonic spin-chains. This includes certain projections qµ,λ which are rep-
resented by MPOs QLµ,λ on the spin chain of length L and which are labelled by certain
pairs of objects µ, λ from N XN . The structure of the double triangle algebra entails that
we can write                                ÿ
                                    QLµ,ν “    d´1        L
                                                A Yµ,ν,A OA                                (9)
                                                  A

in terms of the symmetry operators OA
                                    L
                                             labelled by objects A from M XM . The dA ’s
are quantum dimensions of the simple objects A and the coefficients Yµ,ν,A are defined
in terms of α-induction and relative braidings between N XN and M XM , N XM , M XN .
These coefficients are directly related to the Verlinde S-matrix SA,B in the rather special
case that the fusion rules of M XM are abelian (which happens e.g. in the “Cardy case”,
see below). But in the non-abelian case the fusion rules of M XM cannot in general be
diagonalized and thus the Yµ,ν,A may be seen as a generalized Verlinde tensor.
    Furthermore, the double triangle algebra also contains other, related, operators of
interest for us whose representers are crucial to construct the
Defect algebra. The main result of this paper, which crucially relies on our observations
related to the double triangle algebra, is the construction of certain MPOs associated
with a bipartite anyonic spin chain, which we call ΨLλ,µ;w
                                                       1 ,L2
                                                            1 ,w2
                                                                  and which are labelled by a
pair λ, µ of simple objects from from N XN and by w1 , w2 P Hompαµ´ , αλ` q, where αµ´ , αλ`
                                                            ˚

denote the “α-induced” object relative to a choice braiding in N XN indicated by ˘. Thus,
defining
                                Zµ,λ “ dimHompαµ´ , αλ` q,                               (10)
there are Zµ,λ 2
                   generators ΨLλ,µ;w
                                   1 ,L2
                                         1 ,w2
                                               for each pair pµ, λq. An important point is that,
different from the symmetry operators OA          L
                                                    , the MPOs ΨLλ,µ;w
                                                                  1 ,L2
                                                                       1 ,w2
                                                                             act on the tensor product
of two chains of lengths L1 respectively L2 , see fig. 3 for a schematic drawing and see fig.
46 for a detailed definition.
     We show that MPOs Ψλ,µ;w L1 ,L2
                                      1 ,w2
                                             have several remarkable properties: (i) they commute
among each other, i.e. for different λ, µ etc, (ii) they commute with the local densities of
the chain Hamiltonian, (iii) they act on a “conformal block” (the range of the projector
QLµ11,λ1 b QLµ22,λ2 on the bipartite chain) by fusing in the pair of charges λ, µ, (iv) they
generate an algebra DL1 ,L2 isomorphic to the “defect algebra” that has been found [4, 5, 60]
in the context of 1 ` 1 dimensional CFTs2 .
The abelian nature of the defect algebra (i) shows that it is generated by commuting
projections DA
             L1 ,L2
                    , and (iv) permits us to import the classification by [4, 5, 60] implying
that the minimal projections, DA  L1 ,L2
                                         are labelled precisely by the simple objects A from
M XM . By (ii), the subspace onto which a DA             projects is left invariant by the local
                                                  L1 ,L2


   2
       For a somewhat different approach to defects and fusion algebras in CFTs see [61].


                                                      8
                                            Ψ   L1 L2
                                                ν, ; w1, w2   =
                                                              :   Σ




                                          L1                              L2



Figure 3: Schematic form of the “defect operators” ΨLλ,µ;w  1 ,L2
                                                                 1 ,w2
                                                                       as MPOs on a bipartite
chain of lenghts L1 , L2 . The large blocks with L1 , L2 strands are certain representers of
the double triangle algebra.

densities of the Hamiltonian on either side, so it has a sort of “topological character”. By
(iii), the generators of the defect algebra DL1 ,L2 of the bipartite chain of lenght L “ L1 `L2
are related to a decomposition
                         V L1 ,L2 “ V L1 b V L2 , V Li –             Vλ,µ                   (11)
                                                              à        Li

                                                                      µ,λ:Zλ,µ ‰0

of the Hilbert spaces V Li of each of the two sub-chains pi “ 1, 2q, and, on this tensor
product Hilbert space the generators ΨLλ,µ;w  1 ,L2
                                                   1 ,w2
                                                         of DL1 ,L2 act in a way that is precisely
analogous to the “braided product of two full centers” in the CFT context [60]. [Each
“full center” [4, 5, 60] in the CFT-context corresponds to decomposing the Hilbert space
of the CFT to the left/right of the defect into conformal blocks, and on each side of the
defect, the block associated with the primary with highest weight labels µ, λ appears Zµ,λ
times (10).] Together, (i)–(iv) suggest to us that the range of DA       L1 ,L2
                                                                                in the Hilbert space
of the bipartite anyonic chain precisely corresponds to a specific “transparent boundary
condition” or “defect”: This defect couples and sits in between the two parts of the
bipartite chain, hence at “constant position”.
    It is known that the matrix Zλ,µ (10) is equal modular invariant coupling matrix in
the
ř CFT context appearing e.g. in the decomposition                  of the torus partition function
      Z
  λ,µ λ,µ µχ pqqχ λ pqq or the Hilbert  space ‘       Z
                                                  µ,λ µ,λ H µ
                                                             CFT
                                                                  b  H¯λCFT , which in our categor-
ical setting is defined by (10) This suggests that, for a single chain with Hilbert space
V L , the subspaces Vλ,µ L
                            :“ QLλ,µ V L should be generated from V0,0     L
                                                                               by the action of cer-
tain local operators on the spin-chain which in the continuum limit ought to have the
interpretation of conformal primary operators transforming in the representations pλ, µq
under the Virasoro algebra (assuming N XN can be identified with a category of Vira-
soro representations to begin with). Unfortunately, we have as yet not been able to find
convincing expressions for such operators.

                                                        9
   To summarize the discussion, our results suggest, but of course do not prove, the
correspondences

                    subspaces QLµ,λ V L Ø CFT conformal block pλ, µq,
                                                                                                 (12)
                    subspaces DA     V
                               L1 ,L2 L1 ,L2
                                             Ø CFT states with defect A.

Here, the “CFT” refers to a continuum limit of corresponding anyonic spin chain, should
such a limit exist.
   If the fusion algebra of N XN is of so-called “Cardy-” or “diagonal type”,

                                            Zµ,λ “ δµ,λ ,                                        (13)

corresponding in the CFT-context to a simple diagonal sum ‘µ HµCFT b H¯µCFT , then we
show that our defect operators Ψµ,µ
                                 L1 ,L2
                                        (there are no ‘w’-labels in this case) can be labelled
equivalently by the objects A of the dual fusion category M XM ,

                                   µ Ø A (diagonal models),                                      (14)

and our general results imply that they satisfy an algebra precisely isomorphic to (7):
                                                 ÿ
                             ΨLA1 ,L2 ΨLB1 ,L2 “    C
                                                   NA,B ΨLC1 ,L2 .                   (15)
                                                    C


Of course, the operators OA  L
                               and ΨLA1 ,L2 are not at all the same: The first acts on a
single chain of length L whereas the second on a bipartite chain of lengths L1 , L2 , so one
may tentatively think of the former as associated with “horizontal defects” (inserted at
constant time) and of the latter with “vertical defects” (inserted at constant position).
For general coupling matrices Zµ,λ our abelian defect algebra DL1 ,L2 appears to us in
general different (as an algebra) from the, in general non-abelian, algebra (7) generated
by the symmetry operators OA   L
                                  discussed in connection with defects e.g. in [59, 62, 63],
despite the fact that the central projections in our defect algebra DL1 ,L2 are still labelled
by the simple objects A of the same category M XM . A similar remark applies to the
defects constructed in the context of a wide class of lattice models by [64]. It would be
interesting to understand the connection to these works better3 .
    At any rate, we find it notable that an exact copy of the defect algebra of 1 ` 1-
dimensional CFTs can be constructed for anyonic spin-chains before the continuum limit,
especially in view of the fact that an anyonic spin chain may admit several continuum
limits including non-conformal ones. It would be interesting to understand this point
better.
   3
    The work [59] emphasizes the potential difference between the “input category”, here M XM and
the “output category” of conformal defects and derives certain constraints. Our work on the other
hand is concerned entirely with anyonic chains, although we discover new relationships between certain
algebraic structures and algebraic structures appearing in CFTs. The works by [62, 63] use a more
Euclidean (imaginary time) description and the method of “strange correlators”. The connection of that
construction to ours is unclear to us.




                                                 10
1.3    Summary of notations and conventions
The von Neumann algebras appearing in this paper are always assumed to be infinite
(type III) factors. N Ă M always denotes a finite index inclusion of such von Neumann
factors. Calligraphic letters A, . . . , Z denote algebras, often von Neumann algebras.
Operators from a von Neumann algebra will be denoted by lower case Roman letters.
The adjoint operation in the von Neumann algebra is denoted by x ÞÑ x˚ whereas the
adjoint on the Hilbert space of the spin chain is denoted by :. Operators on a spin
chain of length L are typically denoted by upper case letters AL , ΦL , . . . . Upper case
Roman indices A, B, . . . also denote endomorphisms from M and are represented by
thick solid lines in wire diagrams, Greek symbols µ, ν, . . . denote endomorphisms from
N and are represented by dashed lines. Lower case Roman indices a, b, . . . also denote
endomorphisms from N Ñ M and are represented by thin solid lines.


2     Background
2.1    Von Neumann algebras
General definitions: See e.g. [65]. A von Neumann algebra is an ultra-weakly closed
˚-subalgebra of the algebra BpH q of bounded operators on some Hilbert space, H . The
commutant N 1 of a von Neumann algebra is the von Neumann algebra of all bounded
operators on H commuting with each operator from N . The center of a von Neumann
algebra is consequently N X N 1 . A von Neumann algebra with trivial center is said to be
a factor. Factors can be classified into types I, II, III; the algebras considered in this work
are assumed to be factors of type III. This property is used mainly to set up the calculus
of endomorphisms (see below). In QFT, algebras are of this type [50], so the assumption
is also natural if we have in mind relating the anyonic spin chain constructions back to
QFT.
    An inclusion N Ă M of von Neumann factors is said to be irreducible if N 1 X M
(also called the first relative commutant) consists of multiples of the identity. We will
always assume that we are in this situation when considering inclusions. Associated
with any inclusion of factors there is always the “dual inclusion” M1 Ă N 1 . For some
constructions below, it is also convenient to assume that M is σ-finite and in a “standard
form”, in the sense that there exists a vector |ηy P H such that both M|ηy and M1 |ηy
are dense subspaces of H (in such a case |ηy is called cyclic and separating). For a von
Neumann algebra in standard form one has an anti-linear, unitary, involutive operator JM
exchanging M with M1 under conjugation (i.e. jM pmq “ AdpJM qm :“ JM mJM P M1
iff m P M). The existence of a cyclic and separating vector is a moderate assumption
which we implicitly make throughout.
Conditional expectations: See e.g. [42, 36, 37, 47, 46, 65]. Let N Ă M be an
irreducible inclusion of two von Neumann factors. An ultraweakly continuous linear
operator E : M Ñ N is called a conditional expectation if it is positive, Epm˚ mq ě 0
for all m P M, and if
                                Epn1 mn2 q “ n1 Epmqn2                            (16)
for m P M, ni P N . If there exists any conditional expectation E at all, then the best


                                              11
constant λ ą 0 such that
                           Epm˚ mq ě λ´1 m˚ m for all m P M                              (17)
is called the index of E, and there exists one for which λ is minimal. This λ “ rM : N s is
the Jones-Kosaki index of the inclusion. In this paper we only consider inclusions with a
finite index. In such a case one can always define a conditional expectation E 1 : N 1 Ñ M1
for the dual inclusion.

2.2    Fusion categories, endomorphisms and intertwiner calculus
See e.g. [6, 16, 5, 43, 58, 66]. A fusion category over C is a monoidal category with finitely
many simple objects up to isomorphism and finite-dimensional C-linear morphism spaces,
and such that the unit object is simple. Such a category is called unitary if it can be
equipped with a ˚-operation such that it becomes a C ˚ -category in the sense of [49]. Any
such category can be realized as a category of (finite index) endomorphisms of an infinite
(type III) von Neumann factor, N , and unitary fusion categories realized in this way
will be denoted by N XN . An endomorphism µ P EndpN q of a von Neumann algebra N
is an ultra-weakly continuous ˚-homomorphism such that µp1q “ 1. It is said to have
finite index if rN : µpN qs ă 8, where the definition of index in the case of type III von
Neumann factors is as outlined above. In this paper, all endomorphisms considered are
assumed to have a finite index.
Intertwiners (Ñ Hom-spaces): Given two endomorphisms µ, ν, one says that a linear
operator t P N is an “intertwiner” if tµpnq “ νpnqt for all n P N . The linear space of
all such intertwiners is called HomN pν, µq, but note that a given operator t may belong
to different Hom-spaces. The subscript ‘N ’ which indicates the algebra from which
the intertwiners are taken is sometimes omitted where clear from the context. For the
composition of two endomorphisms we write µν :“ µ ˝ ν. Two endomorphisms are called
equivalent if there is a unitary intertwiner between them and irreducible (or simple) if
there is no non-trivial self-intertwiner. If t P HomN pµ, νq, then t˚ P HomN pν, µq, and if
s P HomN pλ, σq, then
                          s ˆ t :“ sσptq “ λptqs P HomN pλµ, σνq                         (18)
is called the Doplicher-Haag-Roberts (DHR) product. It is associative, satisfies ps ˆ tq˚ “
s˚ ˆt˚ , and gives the Hom-spaces the structure of a tensor category. Note that 1σ ˆt “ σptq
but t ˆ 1σ “ t as operators, where 1σ P Hompσ, σq is the trivial intertwiner (equal to the
identity operator of N ).
Graphical calculus: We often use a graphical calculus for manipulations involving
intertwiners. In this calculus, an intertwiner is adjacent to a set of wires which corre-
spond to the input (bottom) and output (top) endomorphisms µ, ν, . . . . The wires are
typically drawn vertically. So for example, in fig. 4, the box represents an intertwiner
t P Hompλ1 . . . λm , µ1 . . . µn q. The identity intertwiner 1ρ is always drawn as a vertical
line. To represent the composition of (composable) intertwiners we stack them on top of
each other and connect the wires as in fig. 5. The DHR product (18) of two intertwiners
is written by placing the two wire diagrams horizontally next to each other as in fig. 6.
The diagrammatic notation (enriched by various special intertwiners in the following) is
designed to automate certain identities. For example:

                                             12
                                                λ1       λm



                                                     t



                                                μ1       μn




               Figure 4: An intertwiner t P Hompλ1 . . . λm , µ1 . . . µn q.


                                            1                 l



                                                     t

                                           λ1             λm

                                                     s

                                           μ1             μn




Figure 5: A product ts of intertwiners. The diagram is read from bottom to top.




                                       t                          s




                  Figure 6: A DHR product t ˆ s of intertwiners.

• We may slide boxes representing intertwiners in a DHR-product vertically upwards
  or downwards. This corresponds to the equivalent ways of writing the DHR product
  as in (18).

• If we have an identity between products of intertwiners represented by wired di-
  agrams, we may place an arbitrary number of vertical wires to the left or right
  (representing a DHR product with 1µ1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ 1µn ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ or ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ 1µ1 ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ 1µn ) to obtain

                                                13
      a new identity. This follows from the homomorphism property of the µi .
   • Taking ˚ of an intertwiner represented by a wire diagram means reflection across
     the horizontal, or reading it top-to-bottom instead of bottom-to-top.

Decomposition: Let θ P EndpN q. One writes θ – ‘µ Nµ µ if there is a finite set of
irreducible and mutually inequivalent endomorphisms µ P EndpN q and isometries tµ,i P
                                                                   ř řNµ
HomN pθ, µq, i “ 1, . . . , Nµ :“ dimC HomN pθ, µq such that θpnq “ µ i“1 tµ,i µpnqt˚µ,i for
all n P N , and such that
                                                            Nµ
                                                           ÿÿ
                            t˚µ,i tν,j “ δµ,ν δji 1,                 tµ,i t˚µ,i “ 1,       (19)
                                                             µ i“1

see fig. 7 for a wire diagram of the second identity and see fig. 8 for a wire diagram
of the first identity. Note that for any pair pν, µq of endomorphisms in EndpN q with ν
irreducible, the complex linear space HomN pµ, νq is a Hilbert space with inner product
                             t˚ s “ pt, sq1,           t, s P HomN pµ, νq,                 (20)
because t˚ s is a scalar. Then (19) expresses that ttµ,i : i “ 1, . . . , Nµ u is an orthonormal
basis (ONB) of HomN pθ, µq.
                                      µ             ν

                                               t
                              ř
                                  t
                                                                  “
                                               t˚

                                      µ             ν                     µ     ν

                             Figure 7: Wire diagram for (19).

                                      σ

                                          s˚
                              ν                µ             “ ps, tqδλ,σ

                                          t

                                      λ                                         λ

                             Figure 8: Wire diagram for (20).

Fusion: Given irreducible µ, ν from some unitary fusion category N XN Ă EndpN q, the
decomposition into irreducible endomorphisms σ PN XN is a finite sum as in
                                                                                (21)
                                        à σ
                                   µν –    Nµ,ν σ,
                                                       σ


                                                        14
                                  λ̄       λ                                   λ       λ̄

                 λ̄       λ                                 λ        λ̄

                         Figure 9: Wire diagrams for rλ˚ , rλ , r̄λ˚ , r̄λ .

and the non-negative integers Nµ,ν
                                 σ
                                    are called the fusion coefficients. They satisfy obvious
associativity-type conditions resulting from the associativity of the composition of endo-
morphisms. Note that it need not be the case that µν is unitarily equivalent to νµ, so
the fusion matrices Nµ,ν
                      σ
                          need not be symmetric in the lower indices.
Conjugate and Dimension: Let µ P EndpN q be an irreducible endomorphism of
the von Neumann factor N . One calls µ̄ P EndpN q a conjugate endomorphism if the
fusion of µµ̄ and µ̄µ contain the identity endomorphism. We assume throughout that
the dimension of the endomorphisms considered is finite. This dimension is defined (for
example) via the Jones-Kosaki index as dµ “ rN , µpN qs1{2 . When the index of µ is finite,
then there exist rµ , r̄µ P N such that r̄µ P HomN pµµ̄, idq, rµ P HomN pµ̄µ, idq and,

                       µ̄prµ˚ qr̄µ “ 1 “ µpr̄µ˚ qrµ ,   rµ˚ rµ “ dµ ¨ 1 “ r̄µ˚ r̄µ .            (22)

In particular, rµ , r̄µ are multiples of isometries. The second relation gives a relation
with the dimension dµ ” dpµq ě 1 of µ. One has dµ “ dµ̄ and for µ, ν, σ irreducible
endomorphisms of N ,                          ÿ
                                      dµ dν “     σ
                                                Nµ,ν dσ .                            (23)
                                                    σ

These formulas express the additivity/multiplicativity of the quantum dimension under
decomposition/fusion and the invariance under conjugation and are the basic justification
for the usage of the term “dimension” even though dµ in general does not have to be
integer.
    The graphical representation of rµ , r̄µ is given in fig. 9. The wire diagram for the
conjugacy relation is depicted in fig. 10. The wire diagram for the normalization and

                                               μ                          μ


                              μ                    =          =                        μ


                   μ                                    μ                                   μ



Figure 10:   Topological invariance of wire diagram representing the conjugacy relation
(22).

isometry property of r̄λ (similarly for rλ ) is depicted in fig. 11. Similar constructions can
be made if a is an endomorphism from N Ñ M, in which case a is an endomorphism

                                                   15
                                    dλ ¨ 1 “           λ                  λ̄


                           Figure 11: Wire diagram for r̄λ˚ r̄λ “ dλ 1.

                                                           ν         λ̄


                                       ´ ¯´1{2
                                         dν
                                         dµ
                                                               t˚



                                              µ

                            Figure 12: Wire diagram for t̃ given t.

M Ñ N . In either case, one can achieve that ab̄ “ bā. A generalization to reducible
endomorphisms is also possible.
Frobenius duality: Let µ, ν, λ P EndpN q be irreducible and t P HomN pµλ, νq be normal-
ized to one, t˚ t “ 1. Then we define a “Frobenius-dual” endomorphism t̃ P HomN pν λ̄, µq,
see fig. 12,
                                   ˆ ˙´1{2
                                    dν
                             t̃ :“          pt ˆ 1λ̄ q˚ p1µ ˆ r̄λ q.                 (24)
                                    dµ
The normalization factor has been chosen so that t̃˚ t̃ “ 1. One shows that Frobenius
duality is involutive, so we get an anti-isometric identification of intertwiner spaces and
corresponding identities between fusion coefficients.
Conjugate intertwiner: Let µ, ν, λ P EndpN q be irreducible and t P HomN pµλ, νq be
normalized to one, t˚ t “ 1. Then we define a “conjugate” endomorphism

          t̄ :“ p1ν̄ ˆ r̄µ q˚ p1ν̄ ˆ r̄λ ˆ 1µ̄ q˚ p1ν̄ ˆ t ˆ 1µ̄ q˚ prν ˆ 1λ̄µ̄ q P HomN pλ̄µ̄, ν̄q.   (25)

One shows that the normalization is chosen so that t̄˚ t̄ “ 1, and that conjugation is invo-
lutive, so we get an anti-isometric identification of intertwiner spaces and corresponding
identities between fusion coefficients.
Braiding: Let N XN be a unitary fusion category. If µν – νµ for any µ, ν P N XN we say
the system is braided if a consistent choice of the unitaries implementing the equivalence,
called ε˘ pµ, νq P HomM pµν, νµq, i.e. µν “ Adrε˘ pµ, νqsνµ, can be made. Here ˘ refer
to over- and under-crossing which are the adjoints of each other. If we do not have a
superscript as in εpλ, µq then by convention “`” is meant. Consistency means that we
have the so-called braiding-fusion relations (BFE) and the Yang-Baxter relations (YBE).
The YBEs are

 p1ρ ˆ εpλ, µqqpεpλ, ρq ˆ 1µ qp1λ ˆ εpµ, ρqq “ pεpµ, ρq ˆ 1ν qp1µ ˆ εpλ, ρqqpεpλ, µq ˆ 1ρ q. (26)

                                                     16
                                                         =

                                        μ           λ                 μ          λ



       Figure 13: Topological invariance of wire diagram representing the YBE.

They correspond to the wire diagram in fig. 13. The BFEs are (t P Hompµν, λq)

                 εpρ, λqp1ρ ˆ t˚ q “ pt˚ ˆ 1ρ qp1µ ˆ εpρ, νqqpεpρ, µq ˆ 1ν q
                                                                                     (27)
                 εpλ, ρqpt˚ ˆ 1ρ q “ p1ρ ˆ t˚ qpεpµ, ρq ˆ 1ν qp1µ ˆ εpν, ρqq
the first of which corresponds to the wire diagram in fig. 14. We will assume in the


                                                                       t


                                            t
                                                         =
                                    μ           λ                 μ        λ




Figure 14: Topological invariance of wire diagram representing the BFE. There is a
similar diagram with a crossing from right to left and there are similar relations with
over-crossings associated with ε´ pµ, νq.

following that the braiding is non-degenerate, i.e. ε˘ pλ, µq are equal for ˘ and all µ P
N XN if and only if λ “ id. A braiding can be generalized in a natural way to any
endomorphism that is decomposable into irreducible endomorphisms from N XN . The
braiding implies an obvious symmetry of the fusion coefficients.
    One has (µ P N XN ):

                       p1µ ˆ r̄µ q˚ pεpµ, µq ˆ 1µ̄ qp1µ ˆ r̄µ q “ e2πihpµq ,         (28)

where hpµq P R is called the statistics phase. For t P HomM pσ, µνq, µ, ν, σ P N XN , one
can show using the BFE and YBE that

                           tεpν, µqεpµ, νq “ e2πiphpµq`hpνq´hpσqq t.                 (29)

The Rehren matrix, see fig. 28

                    Yµ,ν :“ dµ p1µ ˆ r̄ν q˚ pεpν, µqεpµ, νq ˆ 1ν̄ qp1µ ˆ r̄ν q       (30)

                                                    17
is shown to satisfy Yµ,ν “ λ dλ e2πiphpµq`hpνq´hpλqq Nµ,ν . If the braiding is nondegenerate,
                          ř                           λ

N XN is said to be “modular”. In such a case, Yµ,ν it is equal up to a prefactor to the
Verlinde matrix Sµ,ν which diagonalizes the fusion coefficients.

2.3    Q-systems and subfactors
Q-systems: See [67, 42, 5]. A Q-system is a way to encode an inclusion of properly
infinite von Neumann factors N Ă M possessing a minimal conditional expectation
E : M Ñ N such that the index, denoted here by d2 , is finite. An important point is
that the data in the Q-system only refer to the smaller factor, N .
Definition 1. A Q-system is a triple pθ, x, wq where: θ – ‘i ρi is an endomorphism of
N , w P Hompθ, idq Ă N and x P Hompθ2 , θq Ă N such that

               w˚ x “ θpw˚ qx “ 1,        x2 “ θpxqx,       θpx˚ qx “ xx˚ “ x˚ θpxq,    (31)

see figs. 15, 16, 17 as well as

                                  w˚ w “ d ¨ 1,        x˚ x “ d ¨ 1,                    (32)

see fig. 18.


                         θ            θ       θ         θ       θ           θ

                         x˚                        x˚                       x˚
                                          “                 “
                                  x                x                x

                     θ            θ           θ         θ           θ            θ

Figure 15: Wire diagrams for x˚ θpxq “ xx˚ “ θpx˚ qx, which is equivalent to px˚ ˆ
1θ qp1θ ˆ xq “ xx˚ “ p1θ ˆ x˚ qpx ˆ 1θ q in DHR notation.


                              θ       θ θ                   θ θ         θ
                                  x                                 x
                                                  “
                                      x                         x

                                      θ                         θ

Figure 16: Wire diagrams for x2 “ θpxqx, which is equivalent to px ˆ 1θ qx “ p1θ ˆ xqx
in DHR-notation.

   Given a Q-system, one defines an extension M as follows. As a set, M consists of all
symbols of the form nv, where n P N with the product, ˚-operation, and unit defined by,
respectively
                 n1 vn2 v “ n1 θpn2 qxv, pnvq˚ “ w˚ x˚ θpn˚ qv, 1 “ w˚ v.          (33)

                                                  18
                          id         θ                     θ        id
                          ˚
                      w                                               w˚
                                             “                                 “
                                 x                              x

                                 θ                              θ                       θ

Figure 17: Wire diagrams for w˚ x “ θpw˚ qx “ 1, which is equivalent to pw˚ ˆ 1θ qx “
p1θ ˆ w˚ qx in DHR notation.

                                              θ

                                                  x˚

                                         θ                 θ        “d
                                                  x

                                              θ                            θ

                              Figure 18: Wire diagram for x˚ x “ d1.

Associativity and consistency with the ˚-operation follow from the defining relations. The
conditional expectation is related to the data by Epnvq “ d´1 nw and is used to induce
the operator norm on M. Conversely, given an inclusion of infinite (type III) factors
N Ă M, the data of the Q-system and v P M can be found by a canonical procedure as
follows. If ı : N Ñ M is the inclusion map, we can define a conjugate ı̄ : M Ñ N where
r P HomM pı̄ı, idq and r̄ P HomM pıı̄, idq such that (22) holds with d “ dı “ rM : N s1{2 ,
namely
               pr̄˚ ˆ 1ı qp1ı ˆ rq “ 1ı , pr˚ ˆ 1ı̄ qp1ı̄ ˆ r̄q “ 1ı̄ , r˚ r “ d1 “ r̄˚ r̄ (34)
using the notation of the DHR product (18). Here, and throughout these notes, we use
the notation
                                                     1{2
                            d “ rM : N s1{2 p“ dı “ dθ q                        (35)
for the square-root of the Jones index. In terms of r, r̄, the Q-system for N Ă M is now

                              θ “ ı̄ı,   x “ 1ı̄ ˆ r̄ ˆ 1ı “ ı̄pr̄q,           w “ r.       (36)

The relations for this Q-system follow from the relations (34). We work out “explicitly”
the very well-known case of an inclusion associated with the action of a finite group G in
the appendix as an illustration for the interested reader in app. A.
    The defining relations of M can also be written in a more suggestive way resembling
the operator product expansion (OPE) in QFT. Let θ – ‘i ρi be the decomposition of
θ into irreducible objects, where a given object may appear multiple times. This means
that there are isometries wi P Hompρi , θq in N such that
                                          ÿ
                                  θpnq “      wi ρi pnqwi˚ .                          (37)
                                                       i


                                                           19
Next, define φi :“ wi˚ v P M. The defining relations of a Q-system imply
                      ÿ
              φi φj “     ckij φk , ckij :“ pwi˚ ˆ wj˚ qxwk P Hompρi ρj , ρk q X N .          (38)
                            k


Braided product of Q-systems. See [5]. Assume that we have a braiding between the
sub-objects ρi of θ, we can define a braiding operator of θ2 as
                            ÿ
                ε˘ pθ, θq :“ pwj ˆ wi q˚ ε˘ pρi , ρj qpwi ˆ wj q P Hompθ2 , θ2 q. (39)
                                  i,j

A Q-system for a von Neumann algebra A is called commutative iff ε˘ pθ, θqx “ x. Given
two Q-systems Q1 “ pθ1 , x1 , w1 q, Q2 “ pθ2 , x2 , w2 q and a braiding between the subobjects
of θ1 , θ2 , we can define the braided product Q-system, which has the data

                                   pθ, x˘ , wq “ Q1 ˆ˘ Q2 ðñ                                  (40)
              θ “ θ1 θ2 ,    x˘ :“ p1θ1 ˆ ε˘ pθ1 , θ2 q ˆ 1θ2 qpx1 ˆ x2 q,    w “ w1 ˆ w2 .   (41)

The braided product Q-system is commutative if Q1 and Q2 both are commutative. The
braided product Q-systems define two extension A Ă B12          ˘
                                                                  , which can more explicitly
be described as follows: B12
                          ˘
                             is generated by A and two isometries v1 , v2 satisfying the
relations
                                v2 v1 “ ıpε˘ pθ1 , θ2 qqv1 v2 ,                         (42)
in addition to the relations for v1 , v2 analogous to (33). It follows that the linear space
Bi˘ :“ Avi , i “ 1, 2 define von Neumann algebras intermediate to the braided product
extension in the sense that A Ă B1˘ , B2˘ Ă B12 ˘
                                                  . The braided product extension plays a
role in CFT in the context of defects.
Conditional expectations and canonical endomorphism. See [42]. The minimal
conditional expectation E and its dual E 1 can be described more explicitly using Q-
systems. In terms of the Q-systems, M is generated by N together with a single operator,
v, and N 1 is generated by M1 together with a single operator, v 1 . The operator v 1 can
be defined as follows. Let |Ωy be a cyclic and separating vector for both N , M (which
exists for type III), and let |ηy be a vector such that ωη “ ωΩ ˝ E. Then v 1 : n|Ωy ÞÑ n|ηy
is seen to be an isometry in N 1 , and the dual construction is made for v P M.
    The operators w “ jN pv 1 q P N , w1 “ jM pvq P M1 and the “canonical” endomorphisms

                            γ “ jN jM : M Ñ N ,        γ 1 “ jM jN : N 1 Ñ M1                 (43)

can be defined, where jN pnq “ JN nJN and JN is the modular conjugation4 of N , etc.
The expectations E, E 1 are then given by
                                  1                              1
                            Epmq “ w˚ γpmqw,          E 1 pn1 q “ w1˚ γ 1 pn1 qw1 .           (44)
                                  d                              d
They have the property that JM v 1 “ v 1 JN , JM v “ vJN . The restricted canonical endo-
morphism θ (36) (and similarly for the dual inclusion) is given by

                            θ “ γ|N P EndpN q,       θ1 “ γ 1 |M1 P EndpM1 q,                 (45)
  4
      With respect to a fixed natural cone PN
                                            7
                                              defined by |Ωy.


                                                    20
for a suitable choice of ı̄ (and ı̄1 ), and for such a choice
                                           θ “ ı̄ı,        γ “ ıı̄.                   (46)

α-induction: Let N Ă M be an irreducible inclusion of subfactors with finite index
and associated canonical endomorphism θ P EndpN q. Given a braided unitary fusion
category N XN and an irreducible endomorphism µ P N XN of N , we can define the
α-induced endomorphisms (of M)
                                αµ˘ :“ ı´1 ˝ Adpε˘ pµ, θqq ˝ λ ˝ ı,                   (47)
which is an in general reducible endomorphism of M (even though µ is by definition
irreducible). If we describe the inclusion ı : N Ñ M by a Q-system pθ “ ı̄ı, x, wq, see
sec. 2.3, then M is spanned linearly by elements of the form nv where n P N and where
v is the generator with the relations recalled in sec. 2.3. Then we can write
                                    αλ˘ pnvq “ λpnqε˘ pλ, θq˚ v.                      (48)
   One can derive the following naturality/functorial relations:
   1. (Conjugate) αλ˘ “ αλ˘ ,
   2. (Dimension) dα˘ “ dλ ,
                        λ


   3. (Composition) αλ˘ αµ˘ “ αλµ
                               ˘
                                  ,

   4. (Functoriality 1) If t P Hompλµ, νq, then ıptq P Hompαλµ
                                                            ˘
                                                               , αν˘ q,
   5. (Braiding) Even though M is in general not braided, we have ( as endomorphisms
      of M) αµ˘ αλ˘ “ Adpırε˘ pλ, µqsqαµ˘ αλ˘ ,
   6. (Functoriality 2) if v P Hompαρ´ , αν` q, v 1 P Hompαρ´1 , αν`1 q, then

                               ırε´ pρ1 , ρqspv 1 ˆ vq “ pv ˆ v 1 qırε` pν, ν 1 qs.   (49)

The matrix Zλ,µ :“ dimHompαλ´ , αµ` q commutes with the matrix Yµ,ν and
                               Zλ,µ ‰ 0      ùñ        hpλq ´ hpµq P Z.               (50)

2.4    Relative braiding and systems of endomorphisms
See [58, 55, 56, 57, 41]. When studying a finite index inclusion N Ă M of von Neumann
factors, special systems of endomorphisms often arise. We let ı : N Ñ M be the
embedding and ı : M Ñ N be a conjugate endomorphism. We consider finite sets

                                      N XN     Ă      EndpN , N q                     (51)
                                     M XN      Ă      EndpM, N q                      (52)
                                     N XM      Ă      EndpN , Mq                      (53)
                                     M XM      Ă      EndpM, Mq                       (54)
of equivalence classes of endomorphisms with the following properties:

                                                      21
                               β                b              B


                                Figure 19: Types of lines.

   • Any two members of any of the sets N XM , M XN , M XM , N XN are mutually in-
     equivalent as endomorphisms, irreducible, and have finite index. [The index of
     a P EndpM, N q is defined as da “ rM : apN qs1{2 .]

   • N XN is a unitary fusion category and so in particular is closed under fusion and
     taking conjugates, and so in particular has a unit, the identity endomorphism of N .
     Additionally, it is assumed to be non-degenerately braided, so the fusion in N is
     in particular commutative. Each endomorphism appearing in the decomposition of
     the canonical endomorphism θ “ γ|N “ ı̄ı is required to be contained in N XM , and
     ε˘ pθ, θqx “ x, so the Q-system pθ, x, wq corresponding to N Ă M (see sec. 2.3) is
     commutative in the terminology introduced above. Irreducible objects of N XN will
     be denoted by lower case Greek letters such as µ, ν, λ, . . . .

   • N XM consists of all irreducible endomorphisms b̄ (without multiplicities) appearing
     in the decomposition of λı, where λ P N XN .

   • M XN consists of all irreducible endomorphisms a (without multiplicities) appearing
     in the decomposition of ıλ, where λ P N XN .

   • M XM consists of all irreducible endomorphisms B (without multiplicities) appear-
     ing in the decomposition of ıλı, where λ P N XN . Note that by the other as-
     sumptions, M XM is by itself a unitary fusion category. But it need not have have
     a braiding, for example, so the assumptions on M XM respectively N XN are not
     symmetrical.

    Even though the fusion of general endomorphisms of M may not be commutative
(so in particular not braided), we can define a kind of relative braiding between endo-
morphisms from the sets N XM , M XN , N XN with the alpha-induced endomorphisms in
M XM . These braiding operators are denoted by

                                   ε˘ pλ, b̄q P Hompb̄αλ˘ , λb̄q
                                                                                        (55)
                                   ε˘ pa, λq P Hompαλ˘ a, aλq,

see [58] sec. 3.3 for the definitions and proofs. Recall that we have defined braiding
operators for the alpha induced endomorphisms αλ˘ above in (47). Together with (55),
these satisfy the expected braiding-fusion (BF) relations, used throughout later parts
of this paper, often implicitly when manipulating diagrams. The wire diagrams for the
relative braiding intertwiners (55) are depicted in fig. 20. Our conventions for the wires
are, see fig. 19,

   • Thick solid lines: Endomorphisms A, B, . . . from M XM .

   • Thin solid lines: Endomorphisms a, b, . . . or ā, b̄, . . . from M XN or N XM .

                                                22
                          α+λ                       α-λ                    α+λ                 α-λ




                          a         λ       a              λ       λ             a         λ   a



  Figure 20: Wire diagrams for ε` pa, λq, ε´ pa, λq, ε` pλ, āq, ε´ pλ, āq from left to right.

   • Dashed lines: Endomorphisms µ, λ, . . . from N XN .

Using these conventions, the braiding fusion (BF) relatins are depicted in fig. 21.


                                        μ                                        μ
                                                                                       t


                                                t
                                                               =                     α+λ


                                λ   b                 a                λ     b             a




Figure 21: Topological invariance of wire diagram representing a BF relation with
relative braiding. There is a similar BF relation with crossing from right to left.



2.5    Jones basic construction and Jones projections
See e.g. [47, 46, 16, 67, 42] for the extension of Jones’ theory [30] to type III algebras.
Consider a finite index inclusion N Ă M of type III von Neumann factors in standard
form with conditional expectation E : M Ñ N . Let ω be a faithful normal state
with cyclic and separating vector |Ωy for both N and M implementing ω. Then ω ˝ E
is invariant under E, with corresponding vector representative |ηy. Note that |ηy is
not cyclic. e1 :“ eN :“ rN ηs P N 1 is called the Jones projection associated with the
inclusion and one defines M1 :“ M _ teN u, leading to a new inclusion M Ă M1 .
This process is iterated setting e2 :“ eM “ rMηs P M1 and M2 :“ M1 _ teM u, then
e3 :“ eM1 “ rM1 ηs P M11 and M3 :“ M2 _ teM1 u etc. This gives the Jones tower

                          N Ă M Ăe1 M1 Ăe2 M2 Ăe3 M3 Ă . . . .                                       (56)

One also defines the corresponding Jones tunnel, e.g. by setting

               N1 “ jN jM pMq,       N2 “ jN1 jN pN q,                 N3 “ jN2 jN1 pN1 q, . . .     (57)


                                                          23
which gives
                            . . . N3 Ăe´3 N2 Ăe´2 N1 Ăe´1 N Ăe0 M.                                (58)
Alternatively, one can construct the Jones tunnel by forming the commutant of the Jones
tower for the dual inclusion M1 Ă N 1 . e0 “ eN1 is the projection extending N to M,
e´1 “ eN2 is that extending N1 to N , e´2 “ eN3 is that extending N2 to N1 etc. The maps
jN jM “ jN1 jN “ jN2 jN1 “ . . . correspond to a 2-shift of the tunnel to the left, so establish
that the inclusions N Ă M, N2 Ă N1 , . . . are all isomorphic. The same applies to the
inclusions N1 Ă N2 , N3 Ă N4 , . . . . One thereby sees that the endomorphism θ “ jN jM
is a leftwards 2-shift5 of the even part of the tunnel, giving θk pN q “ N2k . Likewise
γ “ jM jM1 is a leftwards 2-shift of the odd part of the tunnel, giving γ k pMq “ N2k´1 .
    Remembering that the conjugate endomorphism ı of the embedding ı may be chosen
such that γ “ ıı, θ “ ıı, we therefore get

                                           N1 “ııpMq,
                                           N2 “ıııpN q,
                                           N3 “ııııpMq,                                           (59)
                                           N4 “ıııııpN q,
                                                ...,

and so on. The inclusion N Ă M is said to be of finite depth if in the subsequent decom-
positions of ıııııı ¨ ¨ ¨ into (equivalence classes of) irreducible endomorphisms µ P EndpMq,
no new irreducible endomorphisms appear after some “depth” k, and this is implied by
our standing assumptions formulated in sec. 2.4. (This condition is independent of the
condition d ă 8 of finite index.)
    It is possible to obtain more “concrete” expressions for the Jones projections of the
tunnel in terms r P HomM pı̄ı, idq and r̄ P HomM pıı̄, idq appearing in the the conjugacy
relations (34) associated with ı, ı̄ as follows. First, one can derive the dual identities

                         eN1 “ d´1 vv ˚ “ eM1 ,     eM11 “ d´1 v 1 v 1˚ “ eN .                    (60)

Now, eN1 “ e0 whereas jM jM1 peM11 q “ jN jM peM11 q “ jN peM11 q “ e´1 . On the other
hand, we can show that v “ r̄ (by using (34)), and we have already mentioned that
jN pv 1 q “ w, where v, w refer to the Q-system for the extension N Ă M, and v 1 , w1 to
the dual extension M1 Ă N 1 . Finally w “ ıprq, and together this gives the first two
of the following formulas. The remaining formulas follow by the above observation that
θ “ ı̄ı (“ DHR left mutliplication by 1ı̄ ˆ 1ı ˆ . . . ) respectively γ “ ıı̄ ((“ DHR left
mutliplication by 1ı ˆ 1ı̄ ˆ . . . )) represent a leftward 2-shift of the Jones tunnel:

                     e0 “ d´1 r̄r̄˚ ˆ 1ı ˆ 1ı̄ ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ P M X N11
                    e´1 “ d´1 1ı ˆ rr˚ ˆ 1ı̄ ˆ 1ı ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ P N X N21
                    e´2 “ d´1 1ı ˆ 1ı̄ ˆ r̄r̄˚ ˆ 1ı ˆ 1ı̄ ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ P N1 X N31                      (61)
                    e´3 “ d´1 1ı ˆ 1ı̄ ˆ 1ı ˆ rr˚ ˆ 1ı̄ ˆ 1ı ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ P N2 X N41 ,
                        ...,
   5
     A further linear map corresponding to a 1-shift is given by the quantum Fourier transform which is
relevant also in the context of the double triangle algebra but not discussed here, see [36].


                                                  24
                          d´1                                                     ¨¨¨
                                 ı   ı̄     ı    ı̄   ı        ı̄   ı̄   ı   ı̄

Figure 22: Wire diagram for e´4 using the wire diagram for r̄, r̄˚ as in fig. 9 with λ Ñ ı.

and so on, where ˆ is the DHR product, see fig. 22. Note the alternating pattern of ı̄, ı
and r̄, r. The identity intertwiners 1ı and 1ı̄ are inserted to the right in the DHR products
to match the vertical lines to the right of the cup-cap pairs in the wire diagram fig. 22,
but they do not affect the actual value of e´j . Either from (34), or using the diagrams
fig. 10 (applied to ı, ı̄ instead of λ, λ̄) and the value d “ dı “ dı̄ for the circle, fig. 11, one
then gets the Temperly-Lieb-Jones relations (3).

2.6    Higher relative commutants and paths
See e.g. [36, 37] who mainly consider type II case and use bimodule language. The
intersections M X Nk1 and N X Nk`1    1
                                         are called relative commutants. For k “ 0 they
are trivial for an irreducible inclusion N Ă M of factors, and for k ą 0 they are finite-
dimensional matrix algebras if d ă 8. The latter can be seen by giving the relative
commutants an “explicit” description in terms of intertwining operators.
    We first consider the first non-trivial relative commutant N X N21 . Consider the
decomposition of the endomorphism θ “ ı̄ı P EndpN q into irreducibles µ as in (19) using
an ONB of intertwiners tµ,j P HomM pθ, µq. Let niµj :“ tµ,i ptµ,j q˚ . These are matrix units

                                          niµj nlνk “ δjl δµ,ν niµk .                         (62)

By construction niνj P N XN21 because they are elements of N commuting with N2 “ θpN q
since they are in HomN pθ, θq. In fact these matrix units generate N X N21 , so

                                                                                  (63)
                                             à
                                 N X N21 –      MNµ pCq.
                                                      µĂθ


We may apply the analogous reasoning to the relative commutant M X N11 using N1 “
γpMq and a decomposition of γ into irreducibles M with intertwiners tM,j P Hompγ, M q.
This gives
                                                                                  (64)
                                          à
                             M X N11 –        MNM pCq.
                                                      M Ăγ

Bases for the higher relative commutants M X N2k`1      1
                                                           resp. N X N2k1
                                                                          , etc. are obtained by
considering the ONBs of intertwiners appearing in subsequent decompositions of ıııı ¨ ¨ ¨ ı
resp. ıııı ¨ ¨ ¨ ı, etc. We describe the relative commutants M X N2k´11
                                                                            , the other cases are
similar.
    By definition, an element of MXN2k´1    1
                                                is an element of M that is an intertwiner in the
space Homppıı̄q , pıı̄q q. We produce such intertwiners as follows. First, we decompose ıı̄
                     k    k

into irreducibles M1 an ONB of intertwiners tt1 u Ă Hompıı, M1 q (more generally we could
start with a0 P M XN and decompose a0 ı̄). Next we multiply by ı from the right, and
similarly consider an ONB of intertwiners tt2 u Ă HompM1 ı, a2 q, after which we multiply

                                                      25
by ı from the right, and consider an orthonormal set of intertwiners tt3 u Ă Hompa2 ı, M3 q,
and so on until tt2k´1 u Ă Hompa2k´2 ı̄, M2k´1 q. We denote the space of such sequences of
                                                         a0 ,M2k´1 . [The subscript pa0 , M2k´1 q means
isometric intertwiners pt1 , t2 , . . . , t2k´1 q by Path2k´1
that we start with the object a0 and end with M2k´1 .] Then
 tP :“ pt1 ˆ1ı ˆ1ı ˆ¨ ¨ ¨ 1ı q ¨ ¨ ¨ pt2k´3 ˆ1ı ˆ1ı̄ qpt2k´2 ˆ1ı̄ qt2k´1 P Hompa0 pı̄ıqk´1 ı̄, M2k´1 q, (65)
where P can be thought of as a “path label” denoting a compatible sequence of orthonor-
mal intertwiners with suitable source and target endomorphisms.
   By construction we have (generalizing (19))
                                                   ÿ
                              t˚P tP 1 “ δP,P 1 1,   tP t˚P “ 1.                   (66)
                                                         P

The desired basis of M X N2k´11   1
                                                                         ı,M2k´1 u, i.e. the matrix units
                                        is then ttP 1 t˚P : P, P 1 P Path2k´1
are labelled by pairs of paths P, P P Pathı,M2k´1 with the same final object, M2k´1 “
                                            1         2k´1
   1
M2k´1  .
     By fairly obvious variations of the above construction, we could have ended instead
with an a2k P M XN after 2k decompositions, or we could have started with M0 P M XM ,
or both. The corresponding path spaces will be denoted accordingly, and this would be
related to the other higher relative commutants.
     We obviously have a freedom in which order we perform the subsequent decomposi-
tions of ıııı ¨ ¨ ¨ ı, and a different order of the decomposition gives a different basis, e.g. of
M X N2k´11
             . As in the classical case of group representation, we can pass back and fourth
between these bases via 6j-symbols, which are described below.

2.7     6j-symbols
See e.g. [37] (ch. 10, 11) or [40, 39] for the type II case. These references use bi-
module language, which can be translated to sectors as outlined in [37], sec. 10.8., but
with not many details given. We now consider such 6j-symbols (also called quantum
6j-symbols, bi-unitary connections or F-symbols depending on the literature) and dis-
cuss some of their properties needed in the sequel. We consider sets of endomorphism
N XN , N XM , M XN , M XM as in sec. 2.4. Let B, M1 , M2 P M XM , a1 , a2 P M XN . Then we
consider the following two ways of decomposing Ba1 ı as in pBa1 qı or Bpa1 ıq. First, we pick
an ONB of intertwiners t1 P HomM pa1 ı, M1 q and subsequently an ONB of intertwiners
t2 P HomM pBM1 , M2 q. We get an intertwiner
                                  p1B ˆ t1 qt2 P HomM pBa1 ı, M2 q.                                    (67)
Second, we pick an ONB of intertwiners t3 P HomM pBa1 , a2 q and subsequently an ONB
of intertwiners t4 P HomM pa2 ı, M2 q. We get an intertwiner
                                   pt3 ˆ 1ı qt4 P HomM pBa1 ı, M2 q.                                   (68)
The intertwiner
             ¨                ˛
                       t1
            UB ˝t3          t2 ‚ :“ rpt3 ˆ 1ı qt4 s˚ p1B ˆ t1 qt2 P HomM pM3 , M3 q “ C1               (69)
                       t4

                                                    26
                                                             M2
                                                                                              t1
                                                                    t4*
                                                             a2
                                                       t3*
                                  UB   (     t
                                             t4 )
                                           t3 1 t2 =              a1                 t2       UB        t3
                                                       B                  t1
                                                                        M1
                                                                   t2                         t4
                                                             M2




                                   Figure 23: The 6j-symbol UB .

is a multiple of the identity and identified with a scalar C. It is called a 6j-symbol, for a
wire diagram see fig. 23
    Similarly, let t1 P HompM1 ı, a1 q, t2 P HompBM1 , M2 q, t3 P HompBa1 , a2 q, t4 P HompM2 ı, a2 q.
Then we set
                 ¨           ˛
                       t1
            U B ˝t2       t3 ‚ :“ rpt2 ˆ 1ı qt4 s˚ p1B ˆ t1 qt3 P HomM pa2 , a2 q “ C1.   (70)
                       t4

Lemma 1. These 6j-symbols have a number of properties:

  1. (Unit): Writing 0 “ id for the identity endomorphism, we have
                                 ¨            ˛
                                       t1
                              U0 ˝t3       t2 ‚ “ δt2 ,1 δt3 ,1 δt1 ,t4 .                                             (71)
                                       t4

  2. (Unitarity): We have
                                       ¨                   ˛            ¨                 ˛
                         ÿ                      t1                             t1
                                  UB ˝t3               t2 ‚UB ˝t13                    t2 ‚ “ δt4 ,t14 δt3 ,t13        (72)
                         t1 ,t2                 t4                             t14

      as well as                       ¨                   ˛            ¨                 ˛
                         ÿ                      t1                             t11
                                  UB ˝t3               t2 ‚UB ˝t3                     t12 ‚ “ δt1 ,t11 δt2 ,t12       (73)
                         t3 ,t4                 t4                             t4
      where the sums are over an ONB of intertwiners with the appropriate source and
      target endomorphisms. The contragredient 6j-symbol is also unitary.

  3. (Conjugate): We have
                          ¨                    ˛                                              ¨                   ˛
                                    t4                 „                       1{2                   t1
                                                           dpa1 qdpM2 q
                      UB̄ ˝t̃3               t̃2 ‚ “                                      UB ˝t3             t2 ‚,    (74)
                                                           dpa2 qdpM1 q
                                    t1                                                                t4


                                                               27
          and similarly
                               ¨                 ˛                                   ¨                ˛
                                        t4              „                  1{2              t1
                                                            dpM1 qdpa2 q
                          U B̄ ˝t̃3           t̃2 ‚ “                             U B ˝t3         t2 ‚.                (75)
                                                            dpM2 qdpa1 q
                                        t1                                                   t4

Proof. (Unit) This follows from the ONB properties of the intertwiners and the irre-
ducibility of Mi , ai , B, ı, ı.
   (Unitarity) This follows from the ONB properties of the intertwiners, and their Frobe-
nius duals for the contragredient 6j-symbols.
   (Conjugate) The reader is invited to carry out the following steps in a graphical
manner. We begin with the definition of UB̄ and the Frobenius dual intertwiners t̃2 , t̃3 ,
which allows us to write
        ¨              ˛
              t4
    UB̄ ˝t̃3       t̃2 ‚
              t1                                                                                 (76)
    „                       1{2
             dpa1 q               ˚            ˚
  “                              rM   p1M̄1 ˆ rB ˆ 1M1 qxp1M̄1 B̄ ˆ t˚2 qp1M̄1 ˆ rB ˆ 1M1 qrM1 .
      dpa2 qdpM1 qdpM2 q            1



Here we defined x P HompBM1 , M2 q as

                                             x :“ p1B ˆ t˚1 qpt3 ˆ 1ı̄ qt4 .                                           (77)

Next we insert a summation over an ONB s of HompBM1 , M3 q so that the conjugate
intertwiner s̄ runs over an ONB of HompM̄1 B̄, M̄3 q. This gives us
„                         1{2 ÿ
           dpa1 q                      ˚            ˚
                                      rM   p1M̄1 ˆ rB ˆ 1M1 qxps̄ ˆ 1M2 qps̄˚ ˆ t˚2 qp1M̄1 ˆ rB ˆ 1M1 qrM1 .
    dpa2 qdpM1 qdpM2 q         s,M3
                                         1


                                                                                             (78)
The last three factors in parenthesis yield a δs,t2 using the definition and isometric property
of the conjugate intertwiner, so the summation collapses to r. . . s1{2 rM
                                                                         ˚
                                                                           1
                                                                                     ˚
                                                                             p1M̄1 ˆrB ˆ1M1 qpt̄2 ˆ
xqrM2 . Next we insert again a summation over an ONB s of HompBM1 , M3 q, turning
this into
          „                    1{2 ÿ
                   dpa1 q               ˚
                                       rM            ˚
                                            p1M̄1 ˆ rB ˆ 1M1 qpt̄2 ˆ sqp1M̄2 ˆ s˚ xqrM2 .    (79)
            dpa2 qdpM1 qdpM2 q     s,M
                                          1
                                                3


We get a δs,t2 for the same reason as before, so the summation reduces to
                                                                                                  ¨              ˛
     „                        1{2                                „                  1{2                 t1
                dpa1 q                                                dpa1 qdpM2 q
                                      ˚
                                     rM   p1M̄2 ˆ t˚2 xqrM2 “                               UB ˝t3             t2 ‚.   (80)
         dpa2 qdpM1 qdpM2 q             2
                                                                      dpa2 qdpM1 q
                                                                                                          t4

The relation for U B is demonstrated in the same manner. Note that the intertwiners are
not from the same spaces here as in the case of UB and consequently we get a different
prefactor.

                                                             28
2.8      Double triangle algebra
See [58], which is partly based on ideas by Ocneanu [34, 33]. Let N Ă M be an inclusion
of infinite (type III) factors with finite index and finite depth. We consider finite sets
N XM , M XN , M XM , N XN of endomorphisms with the properties described in sec. 2.4,
where ı is the embedding endomorphism from N Ñ M and ı̄ a conjugate endomorphism
from M Ñ N . Note that a P M XN implies that ā P N XM .

Definition 2. As a finite dimensional vector space, the double triangle algebra is defined
by
                                                     ¯ ab̄q.                          (81)
                                    à
                             ♦“            HomM pcd,
                                                         a,b,c,dPM XN

    We note that a given intertwiner might appear in multiple spaces and is considered
as different in such a case. It follows from the definition that a basis of ♦ is given by the
elements

                   es,d,c                     1{4 ˚                          ¯ Bq, t P HomM pab̄, Bq             (82)
                    B;t,b,a :“ pda db dc dd q    st ,             s P HomM pcd,

where s, t run through an ONB of intertwiners. Our conventions for graphically repre-
senting such generators are described in fig. 24.

                                                     c       d¯                          d               b
                                                           s
                                                 1{4                                 s
                                    pda db dc dd q         B             “
                                                                         p                                   t
                                                           t˚                                        B

                                                     a       b̄                          c               a

Figure 24: Left side: wire diagram for a basis element in ♦, read from bottom to top.
Right side: compared to the left diagram, it is rotated by 90 degrees in agreement with
the conventions of [58] and stripped off the prefactor. Their conventions are adapted in
the following in connection with the double triangle algebras and match the conventions
for MPOs and spin chains, which are typically drawn horizontally.

    The product structure ‹ of ♦ is defined by:
           1   1        1   1   1                                            1   1           1   1   1
        s,b ,a
       eB;t,b,a ‹ esB,d  ,c                             ˚            s,b ,a     s ,a ,c
                     1 ;t1 ,d,c :“ δb1 ,c1 δb,c p1a1 ˆ rb1 ˆ 1d¯1 qpeB;t,b,a ˆ eB 1 ;t1 ,a,c qp1a ˆ rb ˆ 1d¯q.   (83)

Here ra P HomN pāa, idq are solutions to the conjugacy relations normalized so that ra˚ ra “
da 1. The product structure will be depicted graphically by wire diagrams such as fig. 25.

    The unit of ♦ with respect to the above product structure is given by ‘a r̄a r̄a˚ , and
the structure constants of the double triangle algebra may be obtained by expanding the
right side in the the given basis using the intertwiner calculus.
    In the literature ‹ is called the “vertical” product. A “horizontal” product ¨ may be
defined by simply using the product structure on (compatible) intertwiners induced by
                                        1 ,a1    s1 ,d1 ,c1                   s,b1 ,a1 s1 ,a1 ,c1
the algebra structure of M, i.e. by es,b
                                      B;t,b,a ¨ eB 1 ;t1 ,d,c :“ δa,c1 δb,d1 eB;t,b,a eB 1 ;t1 ,a,c . Although this


                                                                    29
                      d            b         d1            b1                  d1             b1
                                                                                          1
                                                                                      B
                                         ‹                         “ δd,c1 δa1 ,b d                b
                            B                        B1
                                                                                      B
                      c            a         c   1
                                                           a   1                  c           a

                           Figure 25: The (vertical) product ‹ in ♦.

will not be used in this work, we mention that the horizontal and vertical products are
related by the “quantum Fourier transform” [36] in a similar way as the pointwise product
and convolution of ordinary functions are related by the standard Fourier transfrom.

Definition 3. Zh is the center of ♦ with respect to the horizontal product.

   [58] have analyzed Zh in terms of the braiding and fusion relations in N XN . As a first
result we quote the following. We define
                            ÿ t,b,a       à a             ÿ
                     eB :“     eB;t,b,a “         da db          tt˚ ,                (84)
                                t,a,b                 a,bPM XN              tPHompab̄,Aq


where the second expression emphasizes the sum is understood as an orthogonal sum as
in the orthogonal sum of intertwiner spaces defining ♦. Then Zh “ teB : B PM XM u and
it is shown ([58], thm. 4.4) that
                                                          ÿ dA dB
                                        eA ‹ eB “                        C
                                                                        NA,B eC                        (85)
                                                          C
                                                                   dC

where A, B, C PM XM and NA,B       C
                                       the fusion coefficients. Thus, Zh is a representation of
the fusion ring of M XM under the vertical product.
     If N XN is braided as we are assuming, then Zh Ă ♦ also contains representations
of the fusion rules for N XN , as discussed in [58]. Recall from sec. 2.2 that αλ˘ pmq “
ı̄´1 ˝ ε˘ pλ, θq ˝ λ ˝ ı̄pmq, λ P N XN , m P M are the alpha-induced endomorphisms of M
and ε˘ pλ, θq the braiding operators of N XN . We define the shorthand

                          xαλ˘ , By :“ dimHomM pαλ˘ , Bq,                    B P M XM ,                (86)

and then                                             ÿ
                                p˘
                                 λ :“ dλ                      d´1  ˘
                                                               B xαλ , ByeB P ♦.                       (87)
                                                 BPM XM

Then clearly p˘
              λ P Zh and it is shown ([58] thm. 5.3 and cor. 5.4) that

                                                          ÿ dµ dν
                                        p˘    ˘
                                         µ ‹ pν “
                                                                         λ
                                                                        Nµ,ν p˘
                                                                              λ                        (88)
                                                           λ
                                                                   dλ

where µ, ν, λ P N XN and Nµ,ν
                          λ
                              the fusion coefficients for N XN , i.e. for endomorphisms of
N . Thus, Zh contains two (˘) copies of the fusion ring of N XN .

                                                           30
    Now assume that N XN is in addition non-degenerately braided. Following [58], we
define an element qµ,ν P ♦, µ, ν P N XN by the following expression6 (see fig. 26)
         a             à a              ÿ
                 ´1
  qµ,λ :“ dµ dλ DX              da db          p1a ˆ rµ˚ ˆ 1b̄ qpε´ pa, µ̄q˚ ˆ ε´ pµ, b̄q˚ q
                             a,bPN XM                       vPHompα´   `
                                                                   µ ,αλ q

                            pv̄ ˆ 1ab̄ ˆ vqpε` pa, λ̄q ˆ ε` pλ, b̄qqp1a ˆ rλ ˆ 1b̄ q                       (89)
                 à        a            ÿ
           “               da db              qµ,λ,v,a,b
               a,bPN XM             vPHompα´   `
                                           µ ,αλ q


where v P Hompαµ´ , αλ` q run through an ONB in the sense that for two v, v 1 we have
ıprµ˚ qpv̄ˆv 1 qıprλ q “ δv,v1 . Here v̄ “ pıprλ˚ qˆ1ᾱ´µ qp1ᾱ` ˆv ˚ ˆ1ᾱ´µ qp1ᾱ` ˆıpr̄µ qq P Hompᾱµ´ , ᾱλ` q
                                                               λ                  λ
is the conjugate intertwiner. Furthermore, e defined the global index as
                                                 ÿ               ÿ
                                      DX :“           d2µ “            d2B .                              (90)
                                                              µPN XN           BPM XN




                                    a       v       a



                                                                  =
                                    b       v       b



                                a                    b
                                        μ       μ
                                αμ–                 αμ–
                                v                     v           =          q μ, λ, v, a, b
                                α+λ                 α+λ
                                        λ       λ
                                a                       b
                                                                               Hom ( a b , a b )


Figure 26: Graphical expression of qλ,µ,v,a,b stripped of the numerical prefactors. In the
upper panel, we draw the symbol for this double triangle algebra element rotated by 90
degrees following the conventions of [58]. In the lower panel we draw the normal wire
diagram for the intertwiners in qλ,µ,v,a,b , to be read from bottom to top.

    One of the main results of [58] (thm. 6.9) is that the element qµ,ν P ♦, µ, ν PN XN
are mutually commuting idempotents which coincide precisely with the minimal central
projections of Zh . Furthermore, identifying Zh with an orthogonal sum of full matrix
algebras as in
                                                                                     (91)
                                        à
                                 Zh –         MZµ,ν pCq,
                                                                µ,νPN XN

the size of each block is precisely Zµ,ν “ xαµ` , αν´ y. Thus, we have, in particular,

                                 rqµ,ν , p˘
                                          λ s‹ “ 0,               qµ,ν ‹ qµ1 ,ν 1 “ δµ,µ1 δν,ν 1 qµ,ν .    (92)
   6
       Our definition is seen to be equivalent to that given in [58] if we use lem. 6.2 of that reference.


                                                                       31
Since qλ,µ P Zh which is spanned linearly by the eA , there must exist complex coefficients
Yλ,µ,A such that                         ÿ
                                  qλ,µ “    d´1
                                             A Yλ,µ,A eA .                             (93)
                                              A

By [58], thm. 6.9, the fusion ring M XM is abelian (i.e. AB is unitarily equivalent to BA
for all A, B P M XM ) if and only if Zλ,µ P t0, 1u, and in such a case, the simple objects
A P M XM are in one-to-one correspondence with the pairs of simple objects pλ, µq from
the fusion ring N XN .
    We record some properties of Yλ,µ,A in the following lemma for later.

Lemma 2. The coefficients Yλ,µ,A P C as in (93) satisfy:

  1. We have, see fig. 27,
                                                   ÿ
                                            ´1
                                  Yλ,µ,A “ DX               da db t˚ qµ,λ,v,a,b t,               (94)
                                                  v,a,b,t


     where v is running through an ONB of Hompαλ` , αµ´ q, and for fixed a, b P M XN , t
     is running over an ONB of Hompab̄, Aq. qµ,λ,v,a,b is as in (89).

  2. Ȳλ,µ,A “ Yλ,µ,Ā .

  3. If the fusion ring M XM is abelian, then the matrix Yλ,µ,A labelled by simple objects
                                                       2
     A PM XM and pairs of simple objects pλ, µq P N XN   such that Zλ,µ ‰ 0 is invertible
     and unitary up to normalization and their inverse diagonalize the fusion rules of
     M XM .

   Remark: Yλ,µ,A should be thought of as a generalization of Rehren’s matrix Yρ,ν (30),
under the correspondences ρ Ø pλ, µq, ν Ø A, as one can appreciate by comparing figs.
27 and 28.

                                                                             A

                                                                             t˚
                                                                    a                 b̄
                                                                        λ̄        λ
                                  ?                          ᾱλ`                          αλ`
                                   dµ dλ ř
                       Yλ,µ,A “                               v̄                           v
                                   DX     t,v,a,b da db
                                                             ᾱµ´                          αµ´
                                                                        µ̄        µ
                                                                    a                 b̄
                                                                             t

                                                                             A

           Figure 27: Wire diagram for Yλ,µ,A , read from from bottom to top.




                                                  32
                                                                                   µ

                                  µ                                                t˚
                                                                          α                 β̄
                                                                              λ̄        λ

                                                “ D1X
                                                        ř
              Yλ,µ “ dµ λ̄                 λ                t,α,β dα dβ



                                                                              λ̄        λ
                                                                          α                 β̄
                                  µ
                                                                                   t
                                                                                   µ

Figure 28: Wire diagram for Rehren’s matrix Yλ,µ , read from from bottom to top. To go
to the rightmost diagram intended to indicate the analogy to fig. 27 for Yλ,ν,A , we have
used the BF relations.

Proof. 1) It follows by combining (93), (89), and (84) after multiplying   ř ˚ (93) from the
left with any non-trivial isometry t P Hompab̄, Aq that d´1      Y
                                                               A λ,µ,A  “    v t qµ,λ,v,a,b t. Now
multiply by da db {Dř
                    X and take a sum over an ONB of t P Hompab̄, Aq and then a sum over
a, b. Then we get p a,b Na,Ab̄ da db qd´1
                                       A DX Yλ,µ,A on the left and the claimed formula on the
                                          ´1

right. The result then follows from a,b Na,Ab̄ da db “ a,b Nb,A     da db “ dA b d2b “ dA DX ,
                                          ř               ř      a
                                                                                ř
using the multiplicative property of the dimension and Frobenius reciprocity.
    2) Item 1) shows that Ȳλ,µ,A “ the sum over v of the following expression (in the




                                               33
following we us the shorthand D “ DX ):
                dA t˚ qµ,λ,v,a,b
                       ˚
                                 t
                a
               “ dµ dλ D´1 dA t˚ p1a ˆ rλ˚ ˆ 1b̄ qpε` pa, λ̄q˚ ˆ ε` pλ, b̄q˚ q
                pv̄ ˚ ˆ 1ab̄ ˆ v ˚ qpε´ pa, µ̄q ˆ ε´ pµ, b̄qqp1a ˆ rµ ˆ 1b̄ qt
                a
               “ dµ dλ D´1 r̄a˚ p1a ˆ rb˚ ˆ 1ā qr
                p1a ˆ rλ˚ ˆ 1b̄ qpε` pa, λ̄q˚ ˆ ε` pλ, b̄q˚ qpv̄ ˚ ˆ 1ab̄ ˆ v ˚ q
                pε´ pa, µ̄q ˆ ε´ pµ, b̄qqp1a ˆ rµ ˆ 1b̄ qt ˆ t̄sr̄A
                a
               “ dµ dλ D´1 ıprλ˚ qp1ᾱ` ˆ r̄a˚ ˆ 1α` qp1ᾱ` a ˆ rb˚ 1āα` q
                                         λ                λ           λ                   λ
                                  `      ˚       `        ˚       ˚                   ˚
                 p1ᾱ` ab̄α` ˆ ε pλ, āq ˆ ε pb, λ̄q qpv̄ ˆ 1ab̄ ˆ v ˆ 1bā q
                     λ    λ

                rpε pa, µ̄q ˆ ε´ pµ, b̄qqp1a ˆ rµ ˆ 1b̄ q ˆ 1bā spt ˆ t̄qr̄A
                    ´
                a
               “ dµ dλ D´1 ıprµ˚ qp1ᾱ´µ ˆ r̄a˚ ˆ vqp1ᾱ` a ˆ rb˚ 1āα` q
                                                              λ                   λ
                                  `      ˚       `        ˚
                 p1ᾱ` ab̄α` ˆ ε pλ, āq ˆ ε pb, λ̄q qp1ᾱ´µ ab̄ ˆ v ˆ 1bā q ˚
                                                                                              (95)
                     λ    λ

                rpε´ pa, µ̄q ˆ ε´ pµ, b̄qqp1a ˆ rµ ˆ 1b̄ q ˆ 1bā spt ˆ t̄qr̄A
                a
               “ dµ dλ D´1 ıprµ˚ qp1ᾱ´µ ˆ r̄a˚ ˆ 1α´µ qpε´ pa, µ̄q˚ ˆ rb˚ 1ā ˆ vq
                 p1aµ̄ ˆ ε´ pµ̄, b̄q˚ ˆ 1bāα` qp1ab̄ᾱ´µ ˆ v̄ ˆ 1bāα` q
                                             λ                            λ
                              `          `
                r1ab̄ ˆ pε pb, λ̄q ˆ ε pλ, āqqp1b ˆ rλ ˆ 1ā qspt ˆ ıprλ q ˆ t̄qr̄A
                a
               “ dµ dλ D´1 r̄a˚ p1a ˆ rb˚ ˆ 1ā qr
                t ˆ p1b ˆ rµ˚ ˆ 1ā qpε´ pb, µ̄q˚ ˆ ε´ pµ, āq˚ qpv̄ ˆ 1bā ˆ vq
                pε` pb, λ̄q ˆ ε` pλ, āqqp1b ˆ rλ ˆ 1ā qt̄sr̄A
                a
               “ dµ dλ D´1 dĀ t̄˚ p1b ˆ rµ˚ ˆ 1ā qpε´ pb, µ̄q˚ ˆ ε´ pµ, āq˚ q
                pv̄ ˆ 1bā ˆ vqpε` pb, λ̄q ˆ ε` pλ, āqqp1b ˆ rλ ˆ 1ā qt̄
               “dA t̄˚ qµ,λ,v,b,a t̄.
Here we have used repeatedly the BF relations for the relative braiding operators as
described in [58], and the definition of the conjugate intertwiner and the conjugacy re-
lations. The proof becomes more transparent using graphical notation starting from fig.
27, and we will in the following frequently use such a graphical calculus, see e.g. [58].
Now we take the sum over an ONB of v’s and then the right side gives exactly Yλ,µ,Ā by
item 1) and we are done.
    3) This is obvious by [58], thm. 6.9.

2.9    Subfactors and CFTs on 1 ` 1 Minkowski spacetime
See [50, 42, 16, 15, 10, 9, 68]. In the Haag-Kastler approach to QFT, one can define a
1 ` 1 CFT by starting from a pair of left-and right-moving copies of a chiral CFT, each
given by the Virasoro net tVc pIqu where I runs through the open intervals of S 1 . tVc pIqu
in turn is generated by “quantized diffeomorphisms” of S 1 which act non-trivially only
within the given interval I.
    More precisely [69], each tVc pIqu is a von Neumann algebra acting on a common
Hilbert space, H , which is generated by unitary operators U pf q, f P DiffpS 1 q subject to

                                                     34
the relations U pf qU pf 1 q “ eicBpf,f q U pf ˝ f 1 q, U pidq “ 1, where f, f 1 act non-trivially only
                                        1


within I and where B : DiffpS 1 q ˆ DiffpS 1 q Ñ R is the Bott cocycle. It is customary to
identify the circle S 1 zt´1u minus a point with R via the Caley transform, and then we
can consider the algebras Vc pIq as labelled by open intervals I Ă R. The product of the
left and right moving chiral CFTs is labelled by diamonds D :“ tpt, xq P R2 | t ´ x P
I´ , t ` x P I` u – I` ˆ I´ where I˘ are open intervals of R, and the algebra of observables
of the combined left- and right chiral observables is (see fig. 29)

                         ApDq :“ Vc pI` q b Vc pI´ qopp ,    D – I` ˆ I´ ,                        (96)

with the appropriate notion of tensor product for von Neumann algebras. Here “opp”
means the opposite algebra, which is identical as a vector space but has the opposite
product structure n1 ¨opp n2 :“ n2 n1 and same ˚-structure. These algebras are mutually


                                                  D                   x`


                             x´                              I`
                                   I´



                       Figure 29: The causal diamond D “ I` ˆ I´ .

local, i.e. rApD1 q, ApD2 qs “ t0u when D1 and D2 are space- or timelike related diamonds.
    For each open interval I Ă R, we have a system ∆DHR pIq of irreducible, endomor-
phisms µ of Vc pIq which are in 1-1 correspondence with irreducible, unitary, highest weight
representations of the Virasoro algebra for the central charge c. The endomorphisms in
∆DHR pIq are localized within I, i.e. they can be extended to the quasi-local C ˚ -algebra
generated by all open intervals J Ă R so as to act as the identity on each Vc pJq for any
J X I “ H. It is known that ∆DHR pIq forms a modular tensor category.
    In the Haag-Kastler approach, a rational CFT in 1+1 Minkowski spacetime is a finite
index extension of the net tApDqu, i.e. collection of von Neumann factors

                                            CpDq Ą ApDq,                                          (97)

which are again supposed to be mutually local, meaning that rCpD1 q, CpD2 qs “ 0 for
spacelike D1 , D2 . It is understood how to construct such an extension from the modular
tensor category of transportable endomorphisms µ of Vc pIq. First, one shows that due
to the transportability and conformal invariance, this extension problem is solved once
it is solved for a single, arbitrary reference diamond D0 “ I ˆ I, that is we only need
CpD0 q Ą ApD0 q. The intuitive reason for this is that this diamond can be appropriately
moved to any other diamond by means of elements from the group Mob ˆ Mob, where
Mob “ PSL     2 pRq{t˘1u, for which one automatically has a strongly continuous unitary
           Č
representation on H b H which acts geometrically on the original net tApDqu and
therefore also on tCpDqu.

                                                  35
   Accordingly, we set N :“ Vc pIq, and consider N b N opp p“ ApD0 qq where N opp is the
opposite algebra. Then we consider the chosen endomorphisms µ of N as defining the
modular tensor category N XN :“ ∆DHR pIq. Accordingly, we assume that this contains a
canonical endomorphism (i.e. a Q-system pθ, x, wq) and call ı : N Ñ M the corresponding
extension of N with embedding ı. The desired extension
                                              C Ą N b N opp                                      (98)
is defined by the following Q-system ZrXs :“ pθR , xR , wR q [68]. First, the endomorphism
θR of N b N opp is given by
                                                                                       (99)
                                      à
                               θR :“       Zλ,µ λ b µopp .
                                              λ,µ N XN

The direct sum is understood as follows. For each triple l “ pλ, µ, vq with v running
through an ONB of Hompαµ´ , αλ` q, we pick an isometry Tl P N b N opp such that the
relations of a Cuntz algebra are fulfilled,
                                                 ÿ
                              Tl˚ Tl1 “ δl,l1 1,   Tl Tl˚ “ 1.                  (100)
                                                              l

Then we set θR pn b nopp q “ l Tl pλpnq b µopp pnopp qqTl˚ . (Note that the numbers Zµ,λ P
                                    ř
N0 are equal to the number of basis elements v P Hompαµ` , αλ´ q.) The operator xR P
HompθR , θR2 q is          ÿ ÿ 1
                   xR :“           v
                                 ηe,f ;v,v 2 pTl ˆ Tl1 qrıpeq b ı
                                                                 opp
                                                                     pf ˚ qsTl˚2     (101)
                               l,l1 ,l2 e,f

where e respectively f run through ONBs of Hompλλ1 , λ2 q respectively Hompµµ1 , µ2 q,
so that the embeddings ı : N Ñ M, ıopp : N opp Ñ Mopp produce intertwiners in
Hompαλ´ αλ´1 , αλ´2 q respectively Hompαµ` αµ`1 , αµ`2 q. v 1 runs through an ONB of Hompαλ´1 , αµ`1 q
(similarly for v 2 ), l1 “ pλ1 , µ1 , v 1 q (similarly for l2 ) and Rehren’s structure constants are
defined as                             „            1{2
                         v1              dpµqdpµ1 q
                       ηe,f ;v,v2 :“                     Erıpeq˚ pv ˆ v 1 qıpf qpv 2 q˚ s,     (102)
                                         dpθqdpµ2 q
with E : M Ñ N the minimal conditional expectation. The properties of E and α-
induction imply that ηe,f    v1
                                ;v,v 2 is an intertwiner in HomN pλ, λq, hence a scalar. The isom-
etry wR is defined to be Tid . The formula
                                ÿ
            εR pθR , θR q :“ pTl ˆ Tl1 qrıpε` pµ, µ1 qq ˆ ıopp pε´ pλ, λ1 q˚ qspTl1 ˆ Tl q˚    (103)
                             l,l1

defines a braiding such that εR pθR , θR qxR “ xR , i.e. the Q-system ZrXs :“ pθR , xR , wR q
is commutative, and it is in a sense also the maximal such Q-system. It is called the “full
center” for this reason and there exists a more abstract, equivalent categorical definition
[70]. The summands in the canonical endomorphism θR correspond to the “primary fields”
by which N b N opp has been extended, see sec. 2.3.
    We now set CpD0 q :“ C, and by applying appropriate representers of the conformal
group, these can be transported from the given diamond D Ă R2 to any other diamond
of any shape. Locality of the net tCpDqu is then shown to follow from the commutativity
of the Q-system ZrXs. Since the numbers Zµ,λ P N0 are equal to the number of basis
elements v P Hompαµ` , αλ´ q, the independent primary fields are labelled by pµ, λ, vq.

                                                         36
2.10       Defects for CFTs on 1 ` 1 Minkowski spacetime
See [60, 5, 4]. A variant of the above full center Q-system construction can also be
employed to construct a 1 ` 1 CFT in the presence of a transparent defect. In the
language of conformal nets this situation is encoded in the following way. We have two
finite index nets tDl pDqu and tDr pDqu labeled by causal diamonds D extending the
Virasoro-net tApDqu, as above in (97), (96). However, different from above we require
Einstein causality only in the restricted sense

                       rDl pD1 q, Dr pD2 qs “ t0u if D1 is left-local to D2 .              (104)

Here, “left-local” means that D1 is not only in the causal complement of D2 but also to
the left, see fig. 30. The restricted locality encodes that there is somehow a division of

                              x´                                   x`




                                                            D2
                                         D1




Figure 30: D1 is left-local to D2 . Operators in Dl pD1 q can be thought of as having a “left
shadow”, and operators in Dr pD2 q a “right shadow”. These shadows must not overlap for
commutativity.

the system into a left and a right part and this division is caused by a defect. The defect
is topological (so does not have a precise location) and furthermore invisible from the
viewpoint of the underlying Virasoro net tApDqu which remains local in the unrestricted
sense.
    It turns out that the classification of defects, i.e. finite-index extensions of the Virasoro
net subject to the above restricted locality property is achieved by the “braided product” 7 .
First, we fix a diamond D0 “ I ˆ I, where I is some open interval, and we set N “ Vc pIq,
with Vc the Virasoro net, so that ApD0 q can be identified with N b N opp , see sec. 2.3.
In N b N opp , we have the full center Q-system, ZrXs :“ pθR , xR , wR q. Then we take the,
say `, braided product ZrXs ˆ` ZrXs of two full center Q-systems, see sec. 2.3. The
braided product is a new (commutative) Q-system and thus corresponds to an extension
  `
D12  of N b N opp . Additionally, we have the intermediate extensions D1` and D2` , see sec.
2.3. By construction, N b N opp is (isomorphic to) ApD0 q for a fixed diamond D0 and
we set Dl pD0 q :“ D1` and Dr pD0 q :“ D2` , as well as DpD0 q :“ D12    `
                                                                           . This produces only
a single pair of inclusions of von Neumann algebras, ApD0 q Ă Dl,r pD0 q Ă DpD0 q, and
  7
      Alternatively, one could take ZrXs ˆ` ZrXs.


                                                    37
not a net of inclusions. But this can again be constructed since the endomorphisms of
N XN are transportable. An irreducible defect then corresponds to a central projection
in the von Neumann algebra D12     `
                                     ; more precisely, that part of the common Hilbert space
H b H on which all the algebras Dl,r pDq, ApDq are acting which is the range of the
central projection, corresponds to quantum states with a specific “irreducible” topological
defect.
     A full characterization of the center ZpDq :“ D12   `
                                                                   q has been given in [60, 5]; in
                                                                 ` 1
                                                            X pD12
particular these authors have given a presentation of this center as an algebra in terms of
generators and relations which we use below. These generators, Bλ,µ,w1 ,w2 , are labelled by
             ř objects2λ, µ P N XN and a ´pair`wi P Hompαµ , αλ q. Thus, the dimension
a pair of simple                                                    ´  `

of ZpDq is µ,λP N XN Zµ,λ since dimHompαµ , αλ q “ Zµ,λ , and, because this is also equal
to the number of simple objects in M XM [58], it suggests that the minimal projections
in ZpDq (i.e. irreducible defects) are constructible from the simple objects A P M XM .
That construction has been given in [60, 5] (thm. 5.5 resp. thm. 4.44), building partly
on work by [4].
     The details of that construction are broadly as follows. Let A P M XM , so β :“ ı̄Bı P
N N can be defined which defines m P Hompθβθ, βq as m :“ 1ı̄ ˆ r̄ ˆ 1B ˆ r̄ ˆ 1ı , where
   X
r̄ P Hompıı̄, idq is a solution to the conjugacy relations and where θ “ ı̄ı is the canonical
endomorphism associated with N Ă M. Then one can define

                                                                                            (105)
                                            `                  ˘
                                pB :“ rβ˚ β̄ ε` pθ, βqθβprB˚
                                                             qm rβ

which is a projection in Hompθ, θq and the pB ’s realize a copy of the M XM -fusion ring.
As is shown in more detail in [60, 5] (thm. 5.5 resp. thm. 4.44), one can obtain from the
pB the minimal projections in ZpDq by a canonical procedure based on the observation
that ZpDq – HompΘR , ΘR q.
   These minimal projections are not actually used in the present paper but we will show
that the for an anyonic spin chain based on the non-degenerately braided fusion category
N XN associated with an inclusion of von Neumann factors N Ă M, we can construct
matrix product operators on a bi-partite anyonic spin chain obeying the very same alge-
braic relations as the generators Bλ,µ,w1 ,w2 of ZpDq. The corresponding projections are
then also MPOs, and they determine an orthogonal decomposition of the Hilbert space of
the bipartite spin chain. Each summand is invariant under the local operators built from
the energy densities, and based on these analogies, we consider the summands, labelled
by the simple objects A P M XM , as corresponding to a transparent defect at the level of
the chain.


3     MPOs
3.1    6j-symbols and MPOs
This subsection follows [29] and [39, 40], which is translated to sector language. We
consider sets of endomorphism N XN , N XM , M XN , M XM as in sec. 2.4.
     Let A, B, Mi P M XM , a, b, ai P M XN . Similar to our discussion of relative com-
mutants, we first decompose M0 ı into irreducibles a1 using an ONB of intertwiners
tt1 u Ă HomM pM0 ı, a1 q. Next we multiply by ı from the right, and similarly consider

                                               38
an ONB of intertwiners tt2 u Ă HomM pa1 ı, M2 q, after which we multiply by ı from the
right, and consider an ONB of intertwiners tt3 u Ă HomM pM2 ı, a3 q, and so on until
tt2k u Ă HomM pa2k´1 ı, M2k q, see fig. 1. We denote the space of such sequences of isomet-
                                                                                   A,B . We also
ric intertwiners pt1 , t2 , . . . , t2k q with the property M0 “ A, M2k “ B by Path2k
set                                                    ď
                                          Path2k
                                               c :“         Path2k
                                                                A,A                       (106)
                                                         AP M XM

(here “c” indicates that we have “closed” paths in a sense). In a similar way, we may start
by decomposing a0 ı̄ into irreducible objects M1 with an ONB t1 Ă HomM pa0 ı̄, M1 q, then
we decompose M1 ı into irreducible objects a2 with an ONB t1 Ă HomM pM1 ı, a2 q, and so
on until tt2k u Ă HomM pM2k´1 ı, a2k q. We denote the space of such sequences of isometric
intertwiners pt1 , t2 , . . . , t2k q with the property a0 “ a, a2k “ b by Path2k     a,b , and we again
define the set of closed paths as in (106).
    Fixing k and L “ 2k, we consider the following matrices labelled by closed paths
P “ pt1 , t2 , . . . , tL q, P 1 “ pt11 , t12 , . . . , t1L q P PathLc and A P M XM :
                              L P
                            pOA qP 1 :“
                   ¨             ˛      ¨            ˛          ¨                     ˛    ¨               ˛
     ÿ                    t1                 t2                             tL´1                   tL            (107)
                U A ˝s1         s2 ‚UA ˝s2         s3 ‚¨ ¨ ¨ U A ˝s2L´1             s2L ‚UA ˝s2L         s1 ‚.
  s1 ,...,s2L             t11                t12                            t1L´1                  t1L

 Here, the si , i “ 1, . . . , L{2 run through ONBs of intertwiners with suitable source and
target space. These matrices are identified with linear operators on a finite-dimensional
vector space V L :
Definition 4. (see fig. 1) V L is the vector space whose basis elements |t1 , . . . , tL y “: |P y
are labelled by P P PathLc . Vopen
                               L
                                   is the is the vector space whose basis elements are labelled
by paths P P PathA,B with A, B P M XM or by paths P P PathLa,b with a, b P M XN ,
                    L

depending on the context.
    Thus, we have for example
                                                          ÿ
                                              L
                                             OA |P y :“          L P
                                                               pOA qP 1 |P 1 y,                                  (108)
                                                          P1

where P, P 1 P PathLc . We think of the states |t1 , . . . , tL y “: |P y P Vopen
                                                                               L
                                                                                   as describing
the configurations of a spin-chain of length L, with the intertwiner tx corresponding the
“spin” at “site” x. States in the subspace V L have “periodic boundary conditions”, hence
describe states on closed chain, see fig. 1. The MPOs OA thus naturally act on V L as
indicated in fig. 31, but can be extended to Vopen L
                                                       simply by defining their matrix elements
to be zero for any non-closed path.
    Note that if P P PathLA,B for some A, B P M XM , the formula (65) gives an intertwiner
tP P HomM pApııqk , Bq. Hence, for P, P 1 P PathLA,B , the element t˚P tP 1 is a scalar which we
define as the inner product t˚P tP 1 “ xP, P 1 y1 on Vopen
                                                         L
                                                           (or on its subspace V L ), turning it
into a Hilbert space. The adjoint of a linear operator with respect to this inner product
is denoted by a :. In view of xP |P 1 y “ δP,P 1 using the ONB properties of the intertwiners,
we may simply state this as
                                         pA: qPP 1 “ APP .                                 (109)
                                                        1



The main properties of these matrix product operators (MPOs) are:

                                                           39
                                               UA          ŪA




                                      ŪA




                                                                 UA
                           L
                          OA “




                                      UA




                                                                 ŪA
                                               ŪA         UA


Figure 31: Schematic diagram for the MPO OA representing a map from the outside
legs to the inside legs. Here L “ 8.

Theorem 1. The MPOs satisfy:

  1. (Identity) O0L “ I L , where “0” indicates the identity endomorphism and I L is the
     identity on V L .

  2. (Fusion) For A, B P M XM and any k ě 1, L “ 2k:
                                         ÿ
                                L L
                               OA OB “           C
                                               NA,B OCL .                         (110)
                                              CPM XM


  3. (Conjugate) For A P M XM and any k ě 1, L “ 2k:
                                              L :
                                            pOA      L
                                                q “ OĀ .                         (111)

  4. (Projector) Let DX be the global dimension of X. Then for any k ě 1, L “ 2k, the
     matrix
                                            ÿ dA
                                   P L :“             L
                                                     OA                        (112)
                                          AP X
                                                 D X
                                                   M   M


     is an orthogonal projector, P “ pP q , pP q “ P L .
                                  L          L :       L 2


Proof. (Fusion) Let A, B, C, Mi , Mi1 P M XM , ai P M XN and consider ONBs of isometric




                                              40
intertwiners
                                        t0 PHomM pC, BAq
                                        t1 PHomM pM1 , a1 ıq,
                                        t2 PHomM pM2 , AM1 q,
                                        t3 PHomM pa2 , Aa1 q,
                                        t4 PHomM pM2 , a2 ıq,
                                        t5 PHomM pa3 , Ba2 q,
                                        t6 PHomM pM2 , a3 ıq,
                                        t7 PHomM pM3 , BM2 q,
                                        t8 PHomM pM3 , CM1 q,                                    (113)
                                        t11 PHomM pM31 , a1 ıq,
                                        t13 PHomM pM11 , AM31 q,
                                        t14 PHomM pM21 , a2 ıq,
                                        t15 PHomM pM21 , BM11 q,
                                        t16 PHomM pM21 , a3 ıq,
                                        t17 PHomM pa3 , Ca1 q,
                                        t18 PHomM pa3 , Ca1 q,
                                        t28 PHomM pM21 , CM31 q.
 To prove the fusion relation, we need the following “zipper lemma”, which is one of the
main graphical observations of [29] and algebraically a reinterpretation of the pentagon
identity for 6j-symbols which by definition holds in any unitary fusion category. The
“zipper tensors” are defined as
     ¨            ˛                                       ¨            ˛
            t2                                                  t3
  C ˝                                                 C
YA,B   t0 ;    t8 ‚ :“ t˚7 p1B ˆt˚2 qpt0 ˆ1M1 qt8 , Y A,B ˝t0 ;    t18 ‚ :“ t˚5 p1B ˆt˚3 qpt0 ˆ1a1 qt18
            t7                                                  t5
                                                                                               (114)
and are course also 6j-symbols (note that the arguments of the unbarred and barred
zipper tensor are from different intertwiner spaces).


                                                   “



Figure 32: Schematic diagram for the zipper lemma. Circles represent 6j-symbols U or
U , whereas the triangle represents the tensors Y or Y .

Lemma 3. (Zipper lemma, see fig. 32.) With the intertwiners from the spaces above, we
have
                           ¨            ˛   ¨            ˛     ¨            ˛
               ÿ                 t1                t4                 t2
                                                           C ˝
                        UA ˝t3       t2 ‚UB ˝t5       t7 ‚YA,B   t0 ;    t8 ‚
             t2 ,t4 ,t7          t4                t6                 t7
                                     ¨            ˛    ¨           ˛            (115)
                            ÿ C            t3               t1
                        “      Y A,B ˝t0 ;    t18 ‚UC ˝t18      t8 ‚
                             1
                            t8             t5               t6

                                                  41
and
                                     ¨                  ˛              ¨                 ˛           ¨                   ˛
                                              t11                                 t14                             t3
                     ÿ                                                                         C
                                 U A ˝t13           t3 ‚U B ˝t15                        t5 ‚Y A,B ˝t0 ;                t18 ‚
                   t14 ,t3 ,t5                t14                           t1                                    t5
                                                    ¨                      ˛ 6 ¨                          ˛                         (116)
                                      ÿ                          t13                           t11
                                              C ˝
                                 “           YA,B t0 ;                 t28 ‚U C ˝t28                  t18 ‚
                                       t28                       t15                           t16
where the sums are over an ONB of the respective space.
Proof. The zipper lemma is a version of the pentagon relation. However, we go through
the details to show how this works explicitly once, because we will repeat similar manip-
ulations without showing the complete calculations in several places later on. We prove
the first relation and begin with, noting that the term in r. . . s already is a scalar,
             ÿ
                       t˚6 pt˚5 ˆ 1ı qp1B ˆ t4 qt7 t˚7 Brt˚4 pt˚3 ˆ 1ı qp1A ˆ t1 qt2 sBpt˚2 p1A ˆ t˚1 qq
        t1 ,t2 ,t4 ,t7                                                                                   (117)
                          ˚ ˚                 ˚
                   “ t6 pt5 ˆ 1ı qp1B ˆ t3 ˆ 1ı q
which follows from the ONB properties of the intertwiners and which can be rewritten as
                  ¨            ˛    ¨             ˛
     ÿ                   t1                t4
               UA ˝t3       t2 ‚UB ˝t5         t7 ‚t˚7 p1B ˆt˚2 qp1B ˆ1A ˆt˚1 q “ t˚6 pt˚5 ˆ1ı qp1B ˆt˚3 ˆ1ı q.
t1 ,t2 ,t4 ,t7           t4                t6
                                                                                                         (118)
Now we multiply with t0 from the right on both sides. On the left, we use:
                                                                   ¨              ˛
                                                          ÿ                t2
        t˚7 p1B ˆ t˚2 qp1B ˆ 1A ˆ t˚1 qpt0 ˆ 11 ˆ 1ı q “         C ˝
                                                              YA,B    t0 ;     t8 ‚t˚8 p1C ˆ t˚1 q.      (119)
                                                           t8              t7
On the right side we use:
                                                                                          ¨                   ˛
                                                                           ÿ                         t5
      t˚6 pt˚5 ˆ 1ı qp1B ˆ t˚3 ˆ 1ı qpt0 ˆ 11 ˆ 1ı q “                              C ˝
                                                                                   YA,B t0 ;              t18 ‚t˚6 pt18 ˚ ˆ 1ı q.   (120)
                                                                            t18                      t3
On the term on the right we next use:
                                                                       ¨                   ˛
                                                        ÿ                          t1
                                 t˚6 pt18 ˚ ˆ 1ı q “             UC ˝t18                 t8 ‚t˚8 p1C ˆ t˚1 q.                       (121)
                                                        t1 ,t8                     t6
Putting these identities together yields the result. The second identity is proven in a
similar way.
    To finish the proof of (fusion), we consider the following orthogonality relations
                                ¨           ˛     ¨            ˛
                 ÿÿ                   t2                t12
                            C ˝
                           YA,B  t0 ;         C ˝
                                         t8 ‚YA,B  t0 ;     t8 ‚ “ δt2 ,t12 δt7 ,t17 , (122)
                                                         1
                  C t8 ,t0            t7                t7

                                                                       42
and                                             ¨                       ˛              ¨                     ˛
                                  ÿ                            t2                                t2
                                         C ˝
                                        YA,B t0 ;                           C ˝
                                                                       t8 ‚YA,B t0 ;                      t18 ‚ “ δt8 ,t18 ,                (123)
                               t2 ,t7                          t7                                t7
which follow from the ONB properties of the intertwiners. Similar relations hold for the
barred zipper tensor. Then we look at a matrix element of the product OA             OB , and insert
                                                                                    L L

the first orthogonality relation for the zipper tensor. The matrix element is labelled by
closed paths P “ pt1 , t2 , . . . , tL q, P 2 “ pt21 , t12 , . . . , t2L q P PathLc
                                                                                ¨                 ˛              ¨                ˛
                                                ÿ ÿ ÿ                                      s1                            sL
                            L L P                                        C ˝                        C ˝t ;
                          pOA OB qP 2 “                                 YA,B t0 ;                u‚YA,B 0                       u‚
                                            si ,s1j ,t1k   C    u,t0                       s11                           s1L
                                                           ¨                                ˛         ¨                           ˛
                                                L{2
                                                ź                             t2i´1                                  t12i´1
                                           ¨          U A ˝s2i´1                       s2i ‚U B ˝s12i´1                        s12i ‚        (124)
                                                i“0                           t12i´1                                 t22i´1
                                                           ¨                                ˛      ¨                              ˛
                                                k
                                                ź                        t2j                                     t12j
                                           ¨          UA ˝s2j                       s2j`1 ‚UB ˝s12j                       s12j`1 ‚
                                                j“0                      t12j                                    t22j

 On this expression, we apply the zipper lemma L times, and then we use the sec-
ond orthogonality relation of the zipper tensor, giving an expression which no longer
depends on t0 . The sum over t0 P HomM pAB, Cq then yields the prefactor NA,B  C
                                                                                   “
dimC HomM pAB, Cq.
   (Conjugate): This follows from the property (conjugate) of thm. 1. Note that we
must use the precise form of the quartic root prefactors.
   (Projector): P L “ pP L q: follows from (conjugate). We have
                                                                        ÿ                        dA dB L
                                               pP L q2 “                                C
                                                                                       NA,B         2
                                                                                                      OC                                    (125)
                                                                A,B,CPM XM
                                                                                                  DX

using (fusion). Frobenius reciprocity gives NA,B         and hence
                                             C       B
                                                                                                                         ř       C
                                                 “ NĀ,C                                                                      B NA,B dB “ dĀ dC “
dA dC . So A,B NA,B dB dA “ DX dC and pP q “ P follows.
           ř      C                         L 2    L



3.2           MPOs and double triangle algebra
In this subsection, we define an extended class of MPOs which giving a representation
of the double triangle algebra and of the fusion rings M XM and N XN , and not just of
M XM as in the previous subsection. As in that subsection, we consider the finite sets
N XM ,M XN ,M XM ,N XN of endomorphisms with the properties listed in sec. 2.4, and
paths P “ pt1 , . . . , tL q P Patha1 ,a and P 1 “ pt11 , . . . , t1L q P Pathb1 ,b .
    Fixing an even number L, we consider the linear operators on Vopen                L
                                                                                        defined by the
following matrix elements, see fig. 33:
      1   1                                                         ÿ
   b ,a ,s;L P
 pEB;b,a,t  qP 1 :“ rdpaqdpbqdpa1 qdpb1 qs1{4                             ¨
                                                           s1 ,...,sL`1
              ¨               ˛      $         ¨                                  ˛        ¨                        ˛,      ¨                     ˛
                    t1             k &
                                   ź                            t2j´1                                 t2j            .                      tL
  ¨ ZaB1 ,b̄1 ˝s;           s1 ‚          U B ˝s2j´1                          s2j ‚UB ˝s2j                             B ˝
                                                                                                              s2j`1 ‚ Za,b̄   t; sL`1             ‚.
                    t11                                         t12j´1                                t12j                                  t1L
                                  j“1
                                      %                                                                              -



                                                                               43
                                                 b ‘,a‘,s;L P                       1/4
                                              (E B‘,b,a;t  )P ‘ = [dada‘dbdb ‘]

                                 tL        tL-1        tL-2                   t3            t2             t1
                                                                                                       b
                                b‘
                                   s        UB         UB                 UB                UB         t
                                a      B                                                           B
                                                                                                       a

                                 tL‘        tL-1
                                             ‘         tL-2
                                                        ‘                     t3‘            t2‘           t1‘



                                                              1   1
Figure 33: The matrix element xtL , . . . , t1 |EB;b,a,t  |tL , . . . , t11 y of the symmetry operator
                                                 b ,a ,s;L 1

(MPO). Here ‘P ’ indicates the “path” of intertwiners tL , . . . , t1 .

                     1   1                                            1   1
 Here the labels EB;b,a,t
                   b ,a ,s;L
                             correspond to those on ebB;b,a,t
                                                       ,a ,s
                                                              in the definition of the double tri-
angle algebra, and the matrix elements are set to zero for all other paths whose beginning
and endpoints do not match with a, a1 , b, b1 as above. Za,     B
                                                                 b̄
                                                                    is another type of 6j-symbol
defined as follows (see fig. 34).


                                                                                    M1

                                                                          B                 M2
                                                                                 t8*
                                                                      a       t * t2*
                                              (       t
                                       Z aB, b t; t 8 t 2
                                                        7
                                                            )=            b             b


                                                                                    M1




                                Figure 34: The 6j-symbol Za,
                                                          B
                                                            b̄
                                                               .

    A1 , A2 , B P M XM , a, b, c P M XN and u1 P Hompaı, A1 q, u2 P HompBA2 , A1 q, u3 P
Hompbı, A2 q, t P Hompab̄, Bq. Then we define
                             ¨          ˛
                                     u3
                        B ˝
                      Za, b̄  t; u2     ‚ “ u˚2 pt˚ ˆ u˚3 qp1a ˆ rb ˆ 1ı̄ qu1         (126)
                                     u1
                                                                              ¨            ˛
                                                                                   u3
which is up to a prefactor equal to the complex conjugate of the 6j-symbol UB ˝t        u2 ‚
                                                                                   u1
as can be seen from Frobenius duality. The corresponding Z-type 6j symbol with the
rearranged pattern of the indices is its complex conjugate (with the corresponding sub-
stitution of the intertwiners). The sum runs over a complete ONB of intertwiners in
Hom-spaces compatible with the source and target spaces of ti , t1i implicit in the defini-
tions of the path spaces. Our main observation in this section is the following:

                                                        44
                                                                                                    1   1       1   1
Theorem 2. For any even L “ 2k, the map π L : ♦ Ñ EndpVopen
                                                        L
                                                            q, ebB;b,a,t
                                                                  ,a ,s      b ,a ,s;L
                                                                         ÞÑ EB;b,a,t   is
a representation of p♦, ‹q.
Proof. We let B, B 1 , B 2 , M1 , M2 , M11 , M21 P M XM , a, b, c, d P M XN , and consider the
following intertwiners:
                                               t P HomM pab̄, Bq,
                                               t1 P HomM pcā, B 1 q,
                                               t2 P HomM pB 1 B, B 2 q,
                                               t3 P HomM pcb̄, B 2 q,
                                               s1 P HomM paı, M1 q,
                                                                                                                        (127)
                                               s2 P HomM pbı, M2 q,
                                               s3 P HomM pBM2 , M1 q,
                                               s12 P HomM pcı, M11 q,
                                               s13 P HomM pB 1 M1 , M11 q,
                                               s23 P HomM pB 2 M21 , M11 q,

 Taking a sum over an ONB of intertwiners s3 gives
                                                                          ¨                ˛
                                                                ÿ                     s2
                              pt˚ ˆ s˚2 qp1a ˆ rb ˆ 1d¯qs1 “          B ˝
                                                                     Za, b̄ t; s3          ‚ s3 .                       (128)
                                                                s3                    s1

Multiplication of two copies of this identity, using the ONB property, and standard topo-
logical moves give
                                                                     ¨            ˛       ¨              ˛
                                                    ÿ                          s2                     s1
                                                                B ˝                    B1 ˝ 1
pt1˚ ˆ t˚ ˆ s˚2 qp1c ˆ ra ˆ rb ˆ 1d¯qs12 “                    Za, b̄  t; s3       ‚Zc,ā    t ; s13      ‚p1B 1 ˆ s3 qs13 .
                                                                                                       1
                                                  s1 ,s3 ,s13                  s1                     s2
                                                                                                                  (129)
Employing the definition of the zipper tensor entails
                                      ¨             ˛
                       ÿ                         s2
                                    2
                              Zc,Bb̄ ˝t3 ; s23      ‚rt2˚ pt1˚ ˆ t˚ qp1c ˆ ra ˆ 1b̄ qt3 ss23
                     t3 ,s23                     s1
                                    ¨            ˛2         ¨                ˛        ¨              ˛            (130)
                 ÿ                            s2                         s1                      s3
                               B ˝                     B1 ˝ 1                   B2 ˝ 2               ‚s23 ,
         “                   Za, b̄   t; s3      ‚Zc,ā        t ; s13       ‚YB,B  1   t ; s23
            s1 ,s3 ,s13 ,s23                  s1                         s12                     s13

so we can cancel the sum over the ONB s23 . The resulting identity is graphically repre-
sented in fig. 35.
                                   b1 ,a1 ,s;L a1 ,c1 ,s1 ;L
   Now we represent the product EB;b,a,t      EB 1 ;a,c,t1 as the left side of fig. 36.
   Applying the zipper lemma L times we get the picture on the right side of fig. 36.
Then we apply (203) (i.e. fig. 35) at both ends of that picture, and apply the ONB
property to the sum over u, we get
           1   1      1   1
        b ,a ,s;L a ,c ,s ;L   1
       EB;b,a,t  EB 1 ;a,c,t1
                                                                                                                        (131)
        ÿ                                                                                    1 1 ,s2 ;L
     “       pda da1 q1{2 rs2˚ p1c1 ˆ ra˚1 ˆ 1b̄1 qps1 ˆ sqpt1˚ ˆ t˚ qp1c ˆ ra ˆ 1b̄ qt2 sEBc 2,b;c,b,t 2,

         s2 ,t2


                                                           45
                                                                                                            t2
                                                                                     t8‘                b                                                                                      t2
                                                                                                  t a                                                           t ‘‘*
                                                                                            B
                                                                          B                                                                    t ‘*                 t*
                                  Σ  ‘
                                 t ,t ,t
                                                t8‘‘
                                                            B ‘‘
                                                                   t ‘‘
                                                                          B‘
                                                                                                                  = Σ
                                                                                                                                t ‘‘‘
                                                                                                                                                                         t8‘‘
                                                                                                                                                                                B ‘‘
                                                                                                                                                                                       t ‘‘‘
                                   7 8 8                                                                a
                                                                                     t8 B‘ t ‘ c                                                                t ‘‘‘
                                                                                                                                                                                               t2‘
                                                                                                            t2‘




                          Figure 35: The identity following from eq. (203).

 tL        tL-1                                                                                   tL                                    tL-1
                                                                   t2                                                                                                                                                    t2
                                                                                                                         t ‘‘
b‘ s                                                                                             b‘                                                                                                                      b
           UB     UB       UB             UB                t ba                                    s                                                                                                                  t a
a‘   B                                                 B                                         a‘
                                                                                                                    β‘                                                                                         B‘
                                                                            = Σ                                   t ‘‘
                                                                                                                           B‘‘
                                                                                                                                    UB‘‘                     UB ‘‘               UB‘‘                UB ‘‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                             B‘‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                t ‘‘
                                                                                     t ‘‘,B ‘‘                      B‘                                                                                          B
a‘ s‘                                                              a                             a‘ s                                                                                                                     a
           UB‘    UB‘     UB‘             UB‘               t‘ c                                      ‘                                                                                                                t‘ c
c‘    B‘                                               B‘                                        c‘

                                                                   t2‘                                                                                                                                                    t2‘
 tL‘       tL-1
            ‘                                                                                     tL‘                                   tL-1
                                                                                                                                         ‘



                                                                                                                    1       1                       1    1       1
                                    Figure 36: The product EB;b,a,t  EB 1 ;a,c,t1 .
                                                            b ,a ,s;L a ,c ,s ;L




                                                 tL                     tL-1
                                                                                                                                                                           t2


                         = Σ                   b‘ s
                                               a‘
                                                    ‘‘‘
                                                        B‘‘
                                                                        UB‘‘               UB‘‘                     UB‘‘                       UB‘‘                    b
                                                                                                                                                             B‘‘ t ‘‘‘ a
                                t ‘‘,B ‘‘
                                s ‘‘‘,t ‘‘‘                                                                                                                               t2‘
                                                  tL‘                     tL-1
                                                                            ‘

                                                                                                                                                        B‘‘‘
                                                                          s ‘‘‘*
                                                                                                                                                        s ‘‘‘*
                                                                                                                                        c‘                       b‘
                                                        s‘                       s                                                             a‘       a‘
                                                                        t ‘‘                                                            s‘                   s
                                                                                                                                                 B‘          B
                                                                        t ‘‘*
                                                                                                                                        t ‘*                    t*
                                                        t ‘*                 t*
                                                                                                                                             a           a
                                                                                                                                         c                       b
                                                                                                                                                        t ‘‘‘
                                                                         t ‘‘‘



                                              Figure 37: The right side of fig. 36.

       as described graphically in fig. 37.
          This is precisely the multiplication law in the double triangle algebra “when the indices

                                                                                                 46
                                      2 2
match”, because the scalar Cs,t;s
                              s ,t
                                   1 ,t1 :“ pda da1 q
                                                      1{2
                                                          r. . . s on the right side in (131) is the
                                                  1   1         a1 ,c1 ,s1            c1 ,b1 ,s2
structure constant arising when projecting ebB;b,a,t,a ,s
                                                           ‹ eB   1 ;a,c,t1 onto the eB 2 ;c,b,t2 component,

see bottom panel in fig. 36 and fig. 37. When the indices do not match, we get zero


                                                                                              1/2
                                        E Ba‘,b‘,s;L  c‘,a‘,s‘;L
                                             ,a,b;t E B ‘,c,a;t‘ = [dada ‘]


                                                                         B‘‘
                                                                         s ‘‘*
                                                         c‘                      b‘
                                                                a         a
                                                          s‘                    s
                                      Σ
                                    s ,t ,B
                                     ‘‘ ‘‘    ‘‘         t ‘*
                                                                    B‘          B
                                                                                t*
                                                                                            E Bc‘,b‘,s‘‘;L
                                                                                                 ‘‘,c,b;t‘‘


                                                                a         a
                                                          c                      b
                                                                         t ‘‘



                                                                                    1   1           1   1     1
    Figure 38: The formula for the product EB;b,a,t  EB;a,c,t1 following from fig. 37.
                                            b ,a ,s;L a ,c ,s ;L



simply because the intertwiner spaces do not match either.
   Recall the definition of p¯µ , qµ,ν P Zh [see (87), (89)], where µ, ν P N XN . The above
representation π L gives linear operators

                                                   QLµ,ν :“ π L pqµ,ν q                                           (132)

for any length L of the spin chain. These operators leave the subspace V L Ă Vopen      L

of periodic spin chain configurations invariant because for elements in Zh , the source
and target objects in the corresponding paths P “ pt1 , . . . , tL q P Patha1 ,a and P 1 “
pt11 , . . . , t1L q P Pathb1 ,b are the same, a “ a1 , b “ b1 . We have the following

Corollary 1. The following holds for all L “ 2k ě 0:

   1. For B P M XM we have
                                                       π L peB q “ dB ¨ OB
                                                                         L
                                                                           ,                                      (133)
              L
       where OB coincides with the MPOs defined earlier in (107).

   2. For ν P N XN we have
                                                       π L pp˘           L
                                                             ν q “ dν ¨ Oα˘
                                                                          ν
                                                                            ,                                     (134)
       where OAL
                 coincides with the MPOs defined earlier in (107) and A “ αν˘ are the
       alpha-induced endomorphisms of M.

   3. There holds                                                    ÿ
                                             Oα˘ “                                      xαλ˘ , By OB              (135)
                                                   λ
                                                              BP M XM



                                                                    47
      and we have the fusion
                                                            ÿ
                                       OαL˘µ OαL˘ν “               λ
                                                                  Nµ,ν OαL˘ ,                       (136)
                                                                          λ
                                                        λP N XN

      for all λ, µ, ν P N XN .

  4. We have                                            ÿ
                                            QLλ,µ “                 L
                                                            Yλ,µ,A OA ,                             (137)
                                                        A

    with Yλ,µ,A as in fig. 27 and (94). QLµ,ν “ 0 iff Zµ,ν “ xαµ` , αν´ y “ 0, QLµ,ν “ pQLµ,ν q: ,
                                                               L
    QLµ,ν QLµ1 ,ν 1 “ δµ,µ1 δν,ν 1 QLµ,ν , rOαL˘ , QLµ,ν s “ rOB , QLµ,ν s “ 0 for all µ, ν, λ P N XN , B P
                                               λ
    M XM .
    ř
  5. µ,νPN XN QLµ,ν “ I L , where I L is the identity operator (matrix elements pI L qPP 1 “
    δP,P 1 ) on the spin chain.

  6. QL0,0 “ P L , with P L the orthogonal projector given by thm. 1.

  7. We have
                                          ÿ        dλ dµ L L
                                                        O `O ´ “ P L                                (138)
                                       µ,λP N XN
                                                   DX αλ αµ
                                                                                ř
      with P L the orthogonal projector given by thm. 1 and DX “                             2
                                                                                    µP N XN dµ .

Proof. 1) The is similar to 2) but simpler and therefore omitted. Note that the claim is
consistent with the fusion algebra (85) for eB in the double triangle algebra and theorem
1.
   2) For a, b P M XN , Mi P M XM , λ, µ P N XN , let s P HomM pbλ, aq, t1 P HomM pαλ˘ M2 , M1 q, t2 P
HomM pbı, M2 q, t3 P HomM paı, M1 q be members of ONBs of intertwiners. Now we define
           ¨            ˛
                     t2
    ˘ λ ˝
      Za,b̄ s; t1       ‚ :“ t˚1 pr̄b˚ ˆ 1α˘ ˆ 1M2 qp1b ˆ ε˘ pλ, b̄q ˆ t˚2 qps ˆ rb ˆ 1ı̄ qt3 , (139)
                                           λ
                     t3

see fig. 39. We also define the Z with the rearranged indices used below by complex
conjugation of this expression. A simple BF move and the definition of the 6j-symbols
shows that                     ¨          ˛       ¨           ˛
                                    t2                  t2
                         ˘ λ ˝
                          Za,b̄ s;     t1 ‚ “ Uα˘ ˝s1 ;    t1 ‚                 (140)
                                                λ
                                    t3                  t3
where s1 “ ε˘ pb, λqs, which defines an intertwiner in Hompαλ˘ b, aq. The claim then follows
from the definition (107) of the MPOs OαL˘ and the following lem. 4.
                                                   λ
    3) These formulas follow from (87), (88) combined with 1), 2) and the fact that π L is
a representation of the double triangle algebra.
    4) The relations for QLµ,ν except the formula for the adjoint follows immediately from
the previous theorem and (92). Applying π L to (93) and using (93) and item 1) of lem.
2 gives (??). Then taking the adjoint and using OA    :
                                                        “ OA (see thm. 1) as well as item
2) of lem. 2 gives the claim. The commutation relations follow from 1), 2), the fact that

                                                       48
the triangle algebra elements eB , p˘   µ are in the horizontal center, and the fact that the
qµ,ν are the central projections. ř
    5) By [58], thm. 6.8, we have µ,ν qµ,ν “ e0 , where e0 is the projector eB of the double
triangle algebra with B “ identity morphism. Applying π L gives µ,ν QLµ,ν “ π L pe0 q.
                                                                           ř

Therefore, π L pe0 q is equal to I L since e0 is the unit of the double triangle algebra. (One
can also see using the explicit definition of π L pe0 q in terms of 6j-symbols.)
    6) Evaluating the definition of qµ,ν for
                                           ř µ “ ν “ 0 “ identity morphism in the triangle
algebra (89) shows that it is equal to BP M XM eB “ f0 , which is the “horizontal unit”
in the double triangle algebra. Applying π L and using the definition of P L in theorem 1
gives the result.
    7) This follows from 1), 2), 3) together with [58], thm. 5.10.
Lemma 4. The double triangle elements p˘                                         1
                                       λ have the MPO representations (where P, P P
PathLc and L “ 2k):
                                                ÿ        ÿ
                           π L pp˘  P
                                 λ qP 1 :“ dλ                        ¨
                                                a,b s,s1 ,...,sL`1
        ¨              ˛      $     ¨                                ˛       ¨                ˛,        ¨                 ˛
                t1         k &
                           ź                         t2j´1                       t2j           .                    tL
     λ ˝                                                                                           λ ˝
¨ ˘ Za, b̄ s;         s1 ‚     U α˘ ˝s2j´1                    s2j ‚Uα˘ ˝s2j             s2j`1 ‚ ˘ Za,b̄  s; sL`1          ‚.
                                  λ                                      λ
                t11                                  t12j´1                      t12j                               t1L
                          j“1
                              %                                                                -

Proof. We consider the “`” case and denote by tvu an ONB of partial        isometries of
HomM pαλ` , Bq, where B P M XM , λ P N XN . Thus, v ˚ v “ 1 and v vv ˚ “ 1 in an
                                                                     ř
obvious notation. By definition, this ONB has xB, αλ` y elements. For t P HomM pab̄, Bq,
a, b P N XM , we write
                                      „     1{2
                                   da
                         sv,t,B :“                   ε` pλ, bqpv ˆ 1b qpt˚ ˆ 1b qp1a ˆ rb q,                       (141)
                                   dB

with rb as usual a solution to the conjugacy relations. It follows that as t, v run through
ONBs of intertwiners, sv,t,B runs through an ONB of intertwiners in HomM pbλ, aq. Letting
v, v 1 be two isometries from our ONB of HomM pαλ` , Bq for fixed B, the definitions give
                                  ¨                ˛               ¨       ˛
                 „ ´1{2                        t0                      t0
                   da       ` λ ˝
                             Za,b̄ sv,t,B ; uv1    ‚ “ δv,v1 Z B ˝t; u
                                                              a,b̄
                                                                           ‚           (142)
                  dB                             1                       1
                                                t0                      t0

where u P HomM pBM3 , M1 q, t0 P HomM pbı, M2 q, t10 P HomM paı, M1 q members of ONBs
of intertwiners and Mi P M XM . See fig. 39 for the graphical illustration of these formulas.
Here, uv :“ pv ˆ 1M3 qu, which runs through an ONB of intertwiners in HomM pαλ` M3 , M1 q
as v, u run through ONBs. We also observe that by construction
                      ¨                     ˛                ¨            ˛
                              tj                                  tj
                  Uα` ˝uj,vj      uj`1,vj`1 ‚ “ δvj ,vj`1 UB ˝uj     uj`1 ‚             (143)
                    λ
                               1                                   1
                              tj                                  tj

for partial isometries vj from our ONB of HomM pαλ` , Bq for fixed B. A similar relation
holds for the conjugate 6j-symbol. We make the replacements (142), (143) in each factor
the on the right side of the following expression using an ONB of partial isometries

                                                               49
                                                                                       b                    λ

                                                                          1/2
                                                                                      u       α+λ
                                                                    da
                                                         su,t,B =
                                                                    dB                        B


                                                                                    a b                 b
                                                                                                                            M1

                                                                                                                α+λ         t1,u‘

                                                                                    -1/2
                                                                                              b                         M2          t2*
                                                                         da
                                   Z aB, b   (         t
                                                         )
                                                 t; t 8 2 δ u,u‘ =
                                                       t7                dB                       su,t,B
                                                                                                                λ


                                                                                                                            t3
                                                                                                                         M1


                                                                                +
                                                                                    Z a,λ b   (s ; tu,t,B       1,u‘
                                                                                                                       t2
                                                                                                                       t3     )

Figure 39: Upper panel: the intertwiner su,t,B . Lower panel: Relationship between ˘ Za,
                                                                                      λ
                                                                                        b̄
and Za,
      B
       b̄
          .


vj P HomM pαλ` , Bq for each j in the defining relation for π L multiplied by a Kronecker
delta:
                                                                                ÿ                      ÿ
  δv,v1 π L pet,b,a         P                 1    1 1{4
              B;t1 ,b1 ,a1 qP 1 “ rdpaqdpbqdpa qdpb qs                                                                 δv,v1 δv1 ,v2 ¨ ¨ ¨ δvL ,vL`1 δvL`1 ,v1 ¨
                                                                         u1 ,...,uL`1 v1 ,...,vL`1
          ¨                  ˛      $                ¨                                 ˛            ¨                                     ˛,       ¨                     ˛
                     t1           k &
                                  ź                             t2j´1                                                  t2j                 .                       tL
  ZaB1 ,b̄1 ˝t1 ;          u1 ‚           U B ˝u2j´1                          u2j ‚UB ˝u2j                                                   B ˝
                                                                                                                                    u2j`1 ‚ Za, b̄  t; uL`1              ‚
                     t11                                        t12j´1                                                 t12j                                        t1L
                                  j“1
                                      %                                                                                                    -

 and note that the delta-function implies that we can insert an additional summation over
the vj in the resulting expression, so that we can subsequently use (143) and (142) on
the terms in the product. Then setting s :“ sv,t,B , s1 “ sv1 ,t1 ,B resp. sj “ uj,vj we obtain
an equivalent sum over an ONB of intertwiners in HomM pbλ, aq resp HomM pαλ` Mj , Mj1 q.
In the resulting equality we set v “ v 1 , a “ a1 , b “ b1 , s “ s1 . The left side of the equality
no longer depends on v, so if we perform a summation over v P HomM pαλ` , Bq for fixed
B, we obtain a factor of xB, αλ` y on that side. Then we divide by dB and take the sum
over B and then a, b. This gives among other things a summation over s, sj on the right
side. Using the defining equation eB “ t,a,b et,b,a B;t,b,a results in
                                           ř

              ÿ                                          ÿ          ÿ
                                L     P
                    d´1     `
                     B xB, αλ yπ peB qP 1 “                                     ¨
              B                                          a,b s,s1 ,...,sL`1
          ¨                  ˛      $                ¨                                 ˛               ¨                                   ˛,         ¨                      ˛
                     t1           k &
                                  ź                             t2j´1                                                   t2j                 .                        tL
     λ ˝                                                                                                                                        λ ˝
¨ ` Za, b̄ s;              s1 ‚          U α` ˝s2j´1                          s2j ‚Uα` ˝s2j                                          s2j´1 ‚ ` Za, b̄  s; sL`1               ‚.
                                                 λ                                                λ
                     t11                                        t12j´1                                                  t12j                                         t1L
                                 j“1
                                     %                                                                                                      -


This is equivalent to the claimed statement using the definition of π L and of p˘
                                                                                λ (87).




                                                                                50
3.3      Chain Hamiltonians, local operators
Consider a vector |t1 , . . . , tL y P Vopen        L
                                                      . According to the description of such vectors
as sequences of compatible intertwiners, this may be interpreted as a specific inter-
twiner P HompBpıı̄qk , Cq, where L “ 2k. On HompBpıı̄qk , Cq the Jones projections
Bpe0 q, Bpe´1 q, . . . , Bpe´pL´1q q act by left multiplication, so we have an action of the al-
gebra T Lr0,L´1s generated by these projections on Vopen                  L
                                                                               . We call ExL , x “ 1, . . . , L the
operator induced by the Jones projection e´px´1q on Vopen                   L
                                                                                . Its matrix elements are
                                                  #
                                                   rptx ˆ 1ı qtx`1 s˚ e0 pt1x ˆ 1ı qt1x`1    x even,
                           L 1              1
        xt1 , . . . , tL |Ex |t1 , . . . , tL y “                                                             (144)
                                                   rptx ˆ 1ı̄ qtx`1 s˚ e´1 pt1x ˆ 1ı̄ qt1x`1 x odd,
noting that the expressions are scalars. Using the expressions e0 “ d´1 r̄r̄˚ , e´1 “
d´1 ı̄prr˚ q one easily finds the numerical value of the matrix elements to be
               xt1 , . . . , tL |ExL |t11 , . . . , t1L y
                                                    $´                 ¯1{2
                                                    & dpM1x1 qdpMx q
                                                    ’
                                                                            δax ,ax`1 δa1x ,a1x`1     x even,   (145)
                                                           dpa qdpax q
              “d´1 pt1x`1 , t̃1x qpt̃x`1 , tx q ´ x1                   ¯1{2
                                                    % dpax1 qdpax q
                                                    ’
                                                          dpM qdpMx q
                                                                            δMx ,Mx`1 δMx1 ,Mx`1  1   x odd,
                                                          x


where the intertwiners are supposed to be from the spaces tx P Hompax ı̄, Mx q, tx`1 P
HompMx ı, ax`1 q (and similarly t1x , t1x`1 ) when x is even and from tx P HompMx ı, ax q, tx`1 P
Hompax ı̄, Mx`1 q (and similarly t1x , t1x`1 ) when x is odd. The inner products pt̃x`1 , tx q or
pt1x`1 , t̃1x q are as in (20) and “tilde” means the Frobenius dual of an intertwiner, see (24).
     By construction, the ExL are projections. We denote by
                       T LLrx1 ,x2 s :“ algebra generated by ExL , x1 ă x ă x2 ´ 1,                             (146)
the algebra of local operators acting on the sites x1 , x1 ` 1, . . . , x2 . By construction, these
algebras are isomorphic to Temperly-Lieb-Jones algebras with x2 ´ x1 ´ 1 generators and
parameter d. We have the following Lemma.
Lemma 5. Any element A P T LLr2,L´1s commutes with any MPO in π L p♦q, i.e. with the
image of the double triangle algebra under the representation π L on Vopen
                                                                       L
                                                                           .
Proof. We may write the projectors ExL in terms of 6j-symbols as in [20]. Then we can
see that we can move ExL at any point through the chain of UB , ŪB ’s as in fig. 33 using
a “vertical” version of the zipper lemma, which is proven in exactly the same way as the
zipper lemma itself.
    With a certain amount of tedium, one can also show this directly without a graphical
notation which we do here since we have not demonstrated the vertical zipper lemma.
For definiteness, take x even (the other case is similar). At the level of matrix elements,
the proof boils down to the statement that
                      ¨     1
                               ˛    ¨    1
                                                ˛
          ÿ               t x          t x`1
                   UB ˝s1     t‚ŪB ˝t       s2 ‚x. . . t2x , t2x`1 . . . |ExL | . . . t1x , t1x`1 . . . y
      t,t1x ,t1x`1        tx           tx`1
                      ¨        ˛    ¨           ˛                                                          (147)
          ÿ               t2x          t2x`1
    “              UB ˝s1     t‚ŪB ˝t       s2 ‚x. . . t1x , t1x`1 . . . |ExL | . . . tx , tx`1 . . . y
      t,t1x ,t1x`1        t1x          t1x`1

                                                              51
where the intertwiners are supposed to be from the spaces tx P Hompax ı̄, Mx q, tx`1 P
HompMx ı, ax`1 q, t1x P Hompa1x ı̄, Mx1 q, t1x`1 P HompMx1 ı, a1x`1 qtx P Hompa2x ı̄, Mx2 q, t2x`1 P
HompMx2 ı, a2x`1 q, as well as s1 P HompBa1x , ax q, s2 P HompBa1x`1 , ax`1 q, t P HompBMx1 , Mx q.
Only two 6j-symbols are involved because ExL only acts non-trivially on the sites x, x ` 1.
We now evaluate the left side of (147) making use of the intertwiner calculus, the defini-
tions of the 6j-symbols, of (144), and of e0 “ d´1 r̄r̄˚ :
                                    ˆ             ˙1{2
             ´1                         dpMx2 q                           ÿ
        “d        pt̃2x`1 , t2x q                        δa2x ,a2x`1
                                        dpa2x q                        t,t1x ,t1x`1

         t1˚        1˚                   ˚ ˚                    1      ˚ ˚             1
          x p1ı̄ ˆ tx`1 qpr̄ ˆ 1a1x`1 q tx ps1 ˆ 1ı̄ qp1B ˆ tx qt tx`1 pt ˆ 1ı qp1B ˆ tx`1 qs2
                         ˆ           ˙1{2
           ´1 2        2    dpMx2 q                     ÿ
        “d pt̃x`1 , tx q                  δ  2   2
                                            ax ,ax`1       δa1x ,a1x`1
                             dpa2x q                  1
                                                     t ,t1
                                                                        x x`1

         t1˚        1˚                 ˚     ˚         ˚                1              1            (148)
          x p1ı̄ ˆ tx`1 qpr̄ ˆ 1a1x q tx`1 ptx ˆ 1ı qps1 ˆ 1ı̄ı qp1B ˆ tx ˆ 1ı qp1B ˆ tx`1 qs2
                         ˆ           ˙1{2
           ´1 2        2    dpMx2 q                 ÿ
        “d pt̃x`1 , tx q                  δa2 ,a2
                                            x
                                                       δa1x ,a1x`1
                             dpa2x q            x`1
                                                     1
                                                    tx

         t1˚        1˚      ˚                  1               1˚
          x p1ı̄ ˆ tx`1 qps1 ˆ 1ı̄ı qp1B ˆ tx ˆ 1ı qp1B ˆ tx ˆ 1ı qps2 ˆ r̄q
                                      ˆ                ˙1{2
           ´1 2        2                dpMx2 qdpMx q
        “d pt̃x`1 , tx qpt̃x`1 , tx q                       δa2x ,a2x`1 δax ,ax`1 δs1 ,s2
                                         dpa2x qdpax q

We proceed in a similar manner evaluating the right side of (147),
                                ˆ             ˙1{2
           ´1                       dpMx q                               ÿ
       “d pt̃x`1 , tx q                              δax ,ax`1
                                    dpax q                         t,t1x ,t1x`1

         p1a1x ˆ r̄˚ qpt1x ˆ 1ı qt1x`1 t1˚  ˚              2     1˚    ˚             2
                                        x ps1 ˆ 1ı qp1B ˆ tx qt tx`1 pt ˆ 1ı qp1B ˆ tx`1 qs2


                                ˆ             ˙1{2
           ´1                       dpMx q                              ÿ
       “d pt̃x`1 , tx q                              δax ,ax`1                  δa1x ,a1x`1
                                    dpax q                                                          (149)
                                                                   t1x ,t1x`1

        t1˚    1˚          ˚                   2                  2                      ˚
         x`1 ptx ˆ 1ı qps1 ˆ 1ı̄ı qp1B ˆ tx ˆ 1ı qp1B ˆ tx`1 qs2 p1a1x ˆ r̄ qptx ˆ 1ı qtx`1
                                                                                             1  1

                        ˆ            ˙1{2
          ´1               dpMx q
       “d pt̃x`1 , tx q                   δax ,ax`1 ps˚1 ˆ r̄˚ qp1B ˆ t2x ˆ 1ı qp1B ˆ t2x`1 qs2
                           dpax q
                                     ˆ                   ˙1{2
          ´1 2      2                  dpMx2 qdpMx q
       “d pt̃x`1 , tx qpt̃x`1 , tx q                           δa2x ,a2x`1 δax ,ax`1 δs1 ,s2
                                        dpa2x qdpax q

which is the same as before and thus concludes the proof.
   We mention that for a closed spin chain (i.e. a state in V L ), we may also construct
a Temperly-Lieb projection ExL for x “ L which we think of as involving the sites 1
and L at least in certain cases8 . In the literature, the resulting algebra is called the
“annular Temperly-Lieb algebra” [71]. Assume that the Jones index d2 “ rM : N s ă 4.
  8
      Alexander Stottmeister, private communication.


                                                                            52
                                    ELL :                ¨¨¨    L
                                                               EL´1




Figure 40: Wire diagram for the MPO ELL . The crossings represent BxL :“ ωI L `dω ´1 ExL .

If ω :“ ieiπ{p2pk`2qq , k “ 1, 2, 3 . . . , then d “ ´pω 2 ` ω ´2 q are precisely the possible
values of the square root of the Jones index below 2 (4). It is standard to show that
BxL :“ ωI L ` dω ´1 ExL , x “ 1, . . . , L ´ 1 give a unitary representation of the braid group
on L strands. Now define the projection (see fig. 40)
                                    ˜                ¸      ˜         ¸
                                         ź1                   L´1
                                                              ź
                            ELL “                       L
                                             pBxL q´1 EL´1        BxL                     (150)
                                     x“L´1                       x“1


on the closed spin chain. Then ELL is a projection and we have the additional relations
E1L ELL E1L “ d´1 E1L , EL´1
                         L
                             ELL EL´1
                                  L          L
                                      “ d´1 EL´1 , ELL E1L ELL “ d´1 ELL , rExL , ELL s “ 0 p|x ´ L| ą
1q of the annular Temperly-Lieb algebra (using the opposite braiding pBxL q´1 gives another
representation.)
    For the open (closed) spin chain, we define the Hamiltonian as
                                             L´1
                                             ÿ
                                    H :“ J         ExL    p`JELL q,                            (151)
                                             x“1


where J is a coupling constant. By the previous lemma and cor. 1, we have rOA        L
                                                                                       , ExL s “
rQLλ,µ , ExL s “ 0 for all x P r1, Ls for the closed chain or all x P r1, L ´ 1s for the open
chain. In either case we get, noting that QLλ,µ leave the Hilbert space V L of the closed
chain invariant:

Corollary 2. The local densities ExL of the Hamiltonian leave the “sectors” Vλ,µ
                                                                              L
                                                                                 :“
Qλ,µ V Ă V invariant. The same holds for the open chain.
 L    L    L


    Because the QLλ,µ are non-zero mutually orthogonal projections whenever Zλ,µ ‰ 0
(cor. 1), it follows that we have a corresponding direct sum decomposition of the closed
chain Hilbert space V L into the sectors Vλ,µL
                                               , each of which is invariant under time evo-
lution and local densities of the Hamiltonian. This is analogous to the case of a rational
1 ` 1-dimensional CFT, where the sectors of the total Hilbert space splits into sectors
labelled by pairs of simple objects pλ, µq – which are Virasoro-irreps in that case and cor-
respond to the decomposition of the partition function into λ,µ Zλ,µ χλ pqqχµ pqq – each
                                                                ř
of which is invariant under the densities of the Hamiltonian (Virasoro algebra).




                                                   53
4       Defects
4.1     Defect algebra
In this section, we come to the main results of this paper which concern defects. A
defect is roughly a kind of “boundary condition” for a bi-partite closed spin-chain. In our
approach, each defect corresponds to an appropriately defined orthogonal summand of
the Hilbert space for the full bipartite chain, and is invariant under any local operator
as defined in sec. 3.3 which is not acting on the boundary points separating the sub-
chains. As we will see, our “boundary conditions” are very similar to the classification of
transparent boundaries in 1+1 CFTs, see sec. 2.10, which is in fact the prime motivation
for our construction. The subspaces corresponding to the defects are the eigenspaces of
an abelian algebra, DL1 ,L2 , generated by certain operators ΨLν,ρ;w
                                                                  1 ,L2
                                                                      1 ,w2
                                                                            soldering the two
subchains of lengths L1 , L2 together. 9

    Since the defects “sit” where the two sub-chains meet at some time zero snapshot of
the chain, we think of them as “vertical” and they would remain in a fixed position if
the chain was evolved with a Hamiltonian H L1 ` H L2 which is a sum of a Hamiltonian
made from local operators of subchain 1 and 2 which do not touch the endpoints of
the subchains. The operators OA    L
                                     associated with a single chain (see thm. 1) are also
often discussed in the literature in connection with defects. We tend to think of them as
“horizontal”. The algebra of vertical and horizontal defects turns out to be isomorphic to
the fusion algebra M XM with structure constants NA,B  C
                                                          in the case of diagonal theories,
(see sec. 4.3) although they of course correspond to entirely different representations of
that algebra. In the general case, the algebras seem to be non-isomorphic leaving the
need for further investigations. Defects from the point of view of PEPs are discussed in
app. B, but also here the precise connection needs clarification.
    After these preliminaries, we now come the definition of the MPOs ΨLν,ρ;w      1 ,L2
                                                                                       1 ,w2
                                                                                             and
their structural properties. The operators Ψν,ρ;w1 ,w2 act on the tensor product of two
                                                L1 ,L2

open chains, i.e. the Hilbert space

                                    V L1 ,L2 :“ Vopen
                                                  L1
                                                      b Vopen
                                                          L2
                                                              .                                (152)

However, they couple the two tensor copies together at the end-points in each of the chains
and therefore connect the two systems. These operators generate the algebra DL1 ,L2 and
will be labelled by a pair ν, ρ P N XN and a pair w1 P Hompαν´ , αρ` q, w2 P Hompαρ` , αν´ q,
so that both w1 , w2 may be thought of as running between 1, . . . , Zρ,ν . The operators will
only be defined for pairs pν, ρq such that Zρ,ν ‰ 0, so there are
                                     ÿ
                                            2
                                           Zν,ρ “ | M XM |                              (153)
                                     ν,ρP N XN


such operators, using [58], cor. 6.10 in the equality sign. This suggests that the joint
eigenspaces of the ΨLν,ρ;w
                       1 ,L2
                           1 ,w2
                                 and the central projections of DL1 ,L2 are labelled by the
objects A of M XM , as we will confirm below.
    9
    Throughout, L and L1 , L2 are even numbers as before, due to the fact that we alternate between ı
and ı̄ in the construction of the chain Hilbert space V L . of the subchain.



                                                 54
    To start, we consider the projection operators QLµ11,λ1 and QLµ22,λ2 and according to our
cor. 1, item 5), we can decompose the Hilbert space V L1 ,L2 of the full bipartite chain
into an orthogonal direct sum with summands given by

                               VµL11,λ,L1 ;µ
                                          2
                                             2 ,λ2
                                                   :“ QLµ11,λ1 Vopen
                                                                 L1
                                                                     b QLµ12,λ2 Vopen
                                                                                  L2
                                                                                      .                                                (154)

The operators ΨLν,ρ;w
                  1 ,L2
                      1 ,w2
                            will be engineered to have the following properties:

  1. (Identity) For pν, ρq “ pid, idq the identity endomorphisms, we have

                                                           ΨLid,id;1,1
                                                               1 ,L2
                                                                       “ I L1 b I L2 ,                                                 (155)

      where 1 is the only unitary intertwiner in Hompαid `    ´
                                                           , αid q “ Hompid, idq “ C1 and
      I is the identity operator on the closed chain V (viewed as a projection operator
       Li                                             Li

      on the open chain Hilbert space).

  2. (Conjugate) We have
                                                   pΨLν,ρ;w
                                                        1 ,L2
                                                            1 ,w2
                                                                  q: “ ΨLν,ρ;w
                                                                           1 ,L2
                                                                               ˚
                                                                                 ,w˚
                                                                                     .                                                 (156)
                                                                                              2        1


  3. (Commutativity) We have

                                               rΨLν,ρ;w
                                                    1 ,L2
                                                        1 ,w2
                                                              , ΨLν 11,ρ,L1 ;w
                                                                             2
                                                                               1 ,w 1 s “ 0.                                           (157)
                                                                                      1   2


      If A P T LLr2,L
                   1
                      1 ´1s
                                 L2
                            b T Lr2,L2 ´1s
                                           is any local operator on the doubled chain Hilbert
      space V L1 ,L2
                     “ Vopen b Vopen acting on any sites of chain 1 or chain 2 except for the
                            L1     L1

      endpoints t1, Li u of either chain, then

                                                            rΨLν,ρ;w
                                                                 1 ,L2
                                                                     1 ,w2
                                                                           , As “ 0.                                                   (158)

  4. (OPE) We have
                                                                                   ν 2 ,ρ2 ,w2 ,w2
                                                                    ÿ
                   ΨLν,ρ;w
                       1 ,L2
                           1 ,w2
                                 ΨLν 11,ρ,L1 ;w
                                              2
                                                1 ,w 1 “                          cν 1 ,ρ1 ,w1 1,w1 2;ν,ρ;w1 ,w2 ΨLν 21,ρ,L22;w2 ,w2   (159)
                                               1       2                                      1    2                           1   2
                                                              ν 2 ,ρ2 ,w12 ,w22


      where only such terms occur in the sum for which ν 2 Ă νν 1 , ρ2 Ă ρρ1 , i.e. which are
      compatible with fusion and. The numerical coefficients are defined as
                           ν 2 ,ρ2 ,w2 ,w2
                                                            ÿ w2            w2
                          cν 1 ,ρ1 ,w1 1,w1 2;ν,ρ;w1 ,w2 :“  ηe,f1 ;w1 ,w1 ηf ˚2,e˚ ;w2 ,w1 (160)
                                           1       2                                               1                       2
                                                                           e,f


      where e, f run over ONBs of Hompνν 1 , ν 2 q respectively Hompρρ1 , ρ2 q, and where
           ;w,w1 are Rehren’s structure constants (102).
       w2
      ηe,f

  5. (Fusion)
                                            V L1 ,L2                                               VλL1 1,µ,L1 ;λ                      (161)
                                  L1 ,L2
                                                                                     à                         2
                                 Ψν,ρ;w1 ,w2 λ1 ,µ1 ;λ2 ,µ2
                                                            Ă                                                     1 ,µ1 ,
                                                                                                           1   1   2   2
                                                                              λ11 ,µ11 ;λ12 ,µ12

      where only such terms occur in the sum which have µ1i Ă νµi , λ1i Ă ρλi , i.e. which
      are compatible with fusion.

                                                                    55
                            t5                          t6                               t5                                              t6
                                                                                       t4                                          t7


                            X           t4, t7
                                       e f; t4‘, t7‘                        =                     e2                  f2

                                                                                       t4‘                                         t7‘
                            t5
                              ‘                         t  6
                                                            ‘                                t
                                                                                             5
                                                                                              ‘                                          t6‘



                                                                                                                          1 1
                           Figure 41: The definition of Xes1,t,f2 ;s,t .

                                                                t6
                                                                                                       t2*
                                                                                             λ‘
                                                        e                                                          t3‘*
                                                                                       c
                                                   λ‘
                                                      t7
                                                         b                  =                b                b
                                                                                                                      M

                                             t3                      t3‘                               t6




                         Figure 42: Downwards-pointing triangles.

   We now define the operators ΨLν,ρ;w
                                   1 ,L2
                                       1 ,w2
                                             . We denote by ei respectively fi ONBs of

                                                       e1 P Hompµ1 ν, µ11 q                                                                    (162)
                                                       f1 P Hompρλ1 , λ11 q                                                                    (163)
                                                       e2 P Hompµ2 ρ, µ12 q                                                                    (164)
                                                       f2 P Hompνλ2 , λ12 q,                                                                   (165)

where here and in the rest of this section, i “ 1, 2 refers
                                                          1 1
                                                              to the different
                                                                         1 1
                                                                                    subsystems of
the bipartite periodic chain. Then we define MPOs Xes1,t,f2 ;s,t and Xes2,t,f1 ;s,t acting on two
adjacent sites in the chain as in fig. 41, where the down and right pointing triangles
denote 6j-symbols defined by figs. 42 and 43.
    These figures also implicitly define the intertwiner spaces associated with the indices
of these MPOs. The up- and left-pointing triangles are defined as their complex conju-


                                                                                                              t1*

                                                                                 t2
                                                                                                       ν
                                                                      λ‘                                                     t2*
                                  t1
                                                       ν
                                                                f1                         = f         1
                                                                                                                    λ‘
                                                                      λ‘‘        t2‘
                                                                                                             λ‘‘           t2‘




                          Figure 43: Leftwards-pointing triangles.

                                                                                56
gates. Next, we let a, b, c, d P M XN , µ, λ P N XN , t P Hompλc, bq, s P Hompcµ, dq, v P
Hompαµ´ , αλ` q and put
                          ˆ           ˙1{2
                    1{4         da
x̄t,s,v,a :“ pdµ dλ q                              ps˚ ˆ1a qp1c ˆε´ pµ, āq˚ qp1cā ˆvqp1c ˆε` pλ, āqqptˆ1ā q       P ♦,
                              dc DX
                                                                                                                     (166)
and then                                                           ÿ
                                                 ΦLt,s,v :“                    π L px̄t,s,v,a q.                     (167)
                                                               aP N XN

This definition is illustrated in the upper box of fig. 44 which also shows in the lower box
a graphical illustration of the adjoint. Note that the intertwiner xt,s,v,a P ♦ is depicted
following the conventions by [58], i.e. its graphical representation as a wire diagram is
rotated by 90 degrees relative to our normal conventions for pictures. The formula for
the adjoint is                                  ÿ
                                 pΦLt,s,v q: :“    π L pxt,s,v,a q,                    (168)
                                                                   aP N XN

wherein
                          ˆ           ˙1{2
                    1{4         da
xt,s,v,a :“ pdµ dλ q                               p1a ˆs̄˚ qpε´ pa, µ̄q˚ ˆ1c qpv̄ˆ1ac̄ qpε` pa, λ̄qˆ1c̄ qp1a ˆt̄q    P ♦.
                              dc DX
                                                                                                                     (169)




                                                                                         α+λ v αμ-
                                                                                                             a
                                  Φ      L
                                         t, s, υ       =Σ
                                                       :               π   L
                                                                                 a
                                                                                         λ           μ d
                                                           a   Χ                 c
                                                                                         t     b     s




                                                                                             L

                                                                                     c t            sd

                                (Φ ) := Σ
                                                   †
                                       L                                                 λ     b     μ
                                       t, s, υ                         πL
                                                           a   Χ                         α+λ       αμ-
                                                                                     a         v         a




                                                                                             L

                                      Figure 44: The definition of ΦLt,s,v .




                                                                     57
      Next, we set
                                                    „                             1{2
                       v1                                 dpµ1 qdpνq
                      ζe11,f1 ;w1 v1 :“                                                  Ere˚1 ε´ pµ1 , νq˚ pw1 ˆ v1 qf1 pv11 q˚ s
                                                          dpµ11 qdpθq
                                                    „                             1{2                                                              (170)
                       v1                                 dpµ2 qdpρq
                      ζe22,f2 ;w2 v2 :“                                                  Ere˚2 ε´ pµ2 , ρq˚ pw2 ˆ v2 qf2 pv21 q˚ s
                                                          dpµ12 qdpθq

with vi P Hompαµ´i , αλ`i q, vi P Hompαµ´1 , αλ`1 q and wi as above, see fig. 45. Note the simi-
                                                                              i      i
                                                                                                    v1
larity to Rehren’s structure constants (102) ηe22,f2 ;w2 ,v2 which differ only by the braiding
operators.


                                                                                                  e*                                       e*
                                                                        1/2                                                  1/2
                                                            dλ dμ                                                  dλ dμ
                          ζ    v
                              e, f; w‘v ‘   =
                                            :
                                                           dθ dν
                                                               2
                                                                                         w
                                                                                              f
                                                                                                       v       =   dθ dν
                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                   v
                                                                                                                                           f
                                                                                                                                                w

                                                                                                  v ‘*                                     v ‘*




                    Figure 45: Wire diagram for the ζ-structure constants (170).


Definition 5. We define the following MPO’s on V L1 ,L2 :
                            v1              v1
                  ÿ
 ΨLν,ρ;w
     1 ,L2
         1 ,w2
               :“          ζe11,f1 ;w1 ,v1 ζe22,f2 ;w2 ,v2 ¨
                      ti ,t1i ,si ,s1i ,ei ,fi ,vi ,vi1                                                                                             (171)
  pΦLt11,s1 ,v1 b ΦLt22,s2 ,v2 qpXes22,f,t11 ;s1 ,t1 b I L1 ´2 b Xes11,f,t22 ;s1 ,t1 b I L2 ´2 qpΦLt1 1,s1 ,v1 b ΦLt1 2,s1 ,v1 q: ,
                                               2 1                             1 2                  1 1 1           2 2 2


This definition is illustrated in fig. 46.
   The sums run over ONBs of intertwiners ei , fi as in (162) for fixed ν, ρ and wi and
over ONBs
                                                ti P Hompλi b̄i , c̄i q,                          si P Hompµi b̄i , d¯i q,
                                                                                                                                                    (172)
                                                t1i P Hompλ1i b̄1i , c̄1i q,                      s1i P Hompµ1i b̄1i , d¯1i q.

Definition 6. We define the defect algebra DL1 ,L2 to be the :´ algebra generated by the
operators ΨLν,ρ;w
              1 ,L2
                  1 ,w2
                        .
   The following is one of the main results of this paper and clarifies the nature of the
defect algebra.
Theorem 3. The MPOs ΨLν,ρ;w
                        1 ,L2
                            1 ,w2
                                  as in def. 5 fulfill properties 1)–5).

Proof. 1) In this case fi “ ei “ 1 and consequently Xes22,f,t11 ;s1 ,t1 “ δss12 δtt11 and Xes11,f,t22 ;s1 ,t1 “
                                                                                                                           2 1         2   1        1 2
                               v1                                             v1
δss11 δtt12 , as well as ζe11,f1 ;1,v1 “ δvv11 and ζe22,f2 ;1,v2 “ δvv12 . Therefore, we obtain
  1   2                                                    1                                               2

                                                          ÿ
                          ΨLid,id;1,1
                              1 ,L2
                                      “                            pΦLt11,s1 ,v1 b ΦLt22,s2 ,v2 qpΦLt11,s1 ,v1 b ΦLt22,s2 ,v2 q: .                  (173)
                                                    ti ,si ,vi


                                                                                             58
                                     Ψ    L1 L2
                                          ν, ; w1, w2
                                                        :=                     Σ                        ζ    v1‘
                                                                                                             e1, f1; w1 v1   ζ   v2‘
                                                                                                                                 e2, f2; w2 v2
                                                                    t1, t2, s1, s2, t1‘, s1‘, t2, t2‘
                                                                            v1, v1‘, v2, v2‘




                                              Φ     L1
                                                    t1, s1, υ1                                                               Φ         L2
                                                                                                                                       t2, s2, υ2




                  X      s2 t1
                        e2 f1; s2‘, t1‘                                                            X     s1 t2
                                                                                                        e1 f2; s1‘, t2‘




                                                                    )
                                                                     †
                                           (Φ                                                                                (Φ                       )
                                                    L1                                                                                L2              †
                                                    t1‘, s1‘, υ1‘                                                                     t2‘, s2‘, υ2‘




                                                            L1                                                                            L2


                           Figure 46: Definition of the MPOs ΨLν,ρ;w
                                                                 1 ,L2
                                                                     1 ,w2
                                                                           .


Using now the representations (167), (168) of ΦLt,s,v , pΦLt,s,v q: in terms of elements of the
double triangle algebra ♦, see fig. 44, the representation property of π L (thm. 2), the
relations in ♦ and the expression for qµ,ν in the double triangle algebra, fig. 26 and eq.
(89), the expressions (169), (166), and the product ‹ in the double triangle algebra, we
see that
                  ÿ                                    ÿ
                       ΦtLii,si ,vi pΦLti1,si ,vi q: “   π Li px̄ti ,si ,vi ,a ‹ xti ,si ,vi ,b q
                  vi ,ti ,si                                                        vi ,ti ,si ,a,b
                                                                                      ÿ
                                                                            “                     π Li pqµi ,λi q                                         (174)
                                                                                    µi ,λi
                                                                                      ÿ
                                                                            “                     QLµii,λi ,
                                                                                    µi ,λi


where the sum is over ONBs of intertwiners ti , si as in (172) for fixed µi , λi and
                                                                                 ř then (im-
plicitly) over µi , λi . The statement now follows form cor. 1, item 5), because µi ,λi QLµii,λi “
I Li acts as the identity on the closed chain, and as a projector onto states satisfying pe-
riodic boundary conditions on the open chain.
   2) This is a straightforward consequence of the definition.
   3) The first statement (157) follows from 4) as follows. In (160), we can replace
the summation over e, f by a summation over ε´ pν, ν 1 qe1 , ε` pρ, ρ1 qf 1 where e1 , f 1 run

                                                                                          59
over ONBs of Hompν 1 ν, ν 2 q respectively Hompρ1 ρ, ρ2 q, because the braiding operators
are unitary so this corresponds to a unitary change of bases in these Hom-spaces. Then
we can use the functoriality 2) property of the braiding operators in the α-induction
construction inside Rehren’s structure constants (102) to cancel the braiding opera-
tors and thereby see that the structure constants are symmetric under an exchange of
pν, ρ, w1 , w2 q Ø pν 1 , ρ1 , w11 , w21 q, i.e. the operator algebra (159) is abelian.
    The second statement (158) follows because the local operators A as in the statement
commute with the MPOs ΦtLii,si ,vi by lem. 5. Since the sites on which A act are distinct
from the sites on which the operators X in (171) act, A therefore commutes with (171).
    4) This part of the proof is the most involved. It is carried out largely in terms of
pictures where several computations involving 6j-symbols work similarly as in the proof
of thm. 2 and are therefore not spelled out to the last detail. First we write out the
product in (159). Focussing on the right system L2 and using (174) we obtain fig. 47
using the representation property of π L2 , the relations in the double triangle algebra ♦,
and [58], lem. 6.2 (where the normalization factor on the right side of fig. 60 is δv21 ,v22 ) to
obtain the middle box.
    Zooming in onto the middle part of this figure, we first insert a thick line and a
summation over t, A as in the first step in fig. 48.
    Then we write out the definition of our representation π L2 of ♦, corresponding to the
second step in fig. 48. The summations over t2 , t12 , s2 , s12 can now be carried out yielding
the final diagram in fig. 48. Inserting the identity of fig. 48 into fig. 47, we obtain fig.
49, using also the relation for P L2 in cor. 1, item 6).
    Considering the identity of fig. 49 applied to both subchains L1 and L2 , we obtain
fig. 50.
    We next focus on the middle parts of this figure involving the MPOs P L1 ´2 and P L2 ´2 .
    In fig. 51, we first introduce summations over t2 , t12 , s2 , s12 to go to the second panel.
Then we insert the expression of P L2 ´2 as an MPO, cor. 1, item 6), and perform simple
manipulations with 6j-symbols very similar to the proof of thm. 1 to go to fig. 52. To
arrive at fig. 53, we use the representation property of π L2 , thm. 1. To go to the second
panel, we have written out the representation π L2 and performed simple manipulations
with 6j-symbols very similar to the proof of thm. 1. Using the representation property
of π L2 , this allows us after the steps shown in fig. 53 to eliminate the projectors P Li ´2 in
fig. 50 in terms of identity operators, and the figure now starts to look like structurally
similar to the diagram for a single Ψ-operator, as in fig. 46.
    With this replacement understood in fig. 46, we now zoom in onto one of the parts
involving the intertwiners ei , fi , e1i , fi1 , wherein

                                    e11 P Hompµ11 ν 1 , µ21 q                              (175)
                                    f11 P Hompρ1 λ11 , λ21 q                               (176)
                                    e12 P Hompµ12 ρ1 , µ22 q                               (177)
                                    f21 P Hompν 1 λ12 , λ22 q.                             (178)

This is shown in figs. 54, 55.
    The summations over ONBs of appropriate intertwiners implicit in the non-open wires
yield the right panels using the properties of the 6j-symbols. Next, we zoom in onto the
ζ-factors (see fig. 45) in fig. 50, which are displayed as wire-diagrams in fig. 56.

                                                60
                      Ψ   L1 L2
                          ν, ; w1, w2   Ψ   L1 L2
                                            ν, ; w1‘, w2‘       =               Σ                           ζ   v1‘
                                                                                                                e1, f1; w1 v1   ζ   v2‘
                                                                                                                                    e2, f2; w2 v2
                                                                     t1, t2, s1, s2, t1‘, s1‘, t2, t2‘
                                                                             v1, v1‘, v2, v2‘




                                                                                v2
                                                     π   L2



                                                                      t2                s2

                                                         t2                                         s2

                                             f2                                                             e2

                                                         t2‘                                        s2‘

                                                                     t2‘                   s2‘
                                                     πL     2




                                                                    t2‘‘                   s2‘‘

                                                         t2‘‘                                       s2‘‘

                                             f2‘                                                            e2‘

                                                       t2‘‘‘                                        s2‘‘‘

                                                                     t2‘‘‘                 s2‘‘‘
                                                     πL     2




                                                                               v2‘‘




                                                                             L2

     Figure 47: Right half of the graphical representation of the left side of (159).

    We can carry out the summation over vi1 (for a similar argument, see the proof of thm.
1.4 in [68]), leading to the second panel. We next observe that both in fig. 54 and fig.
55, fig. 41 as well as in fig. 56, we have summations over ONBs p1ρ1 ˆ f1 qf11 , p1ν 1 ˆ f2 qf21 ,
 1 pe1 ˆ 1ν 1 q, e2 pe2 ˆ 1ρ1 q respectively their adjoints. By unitarity of the 6j-symbols we
e1˚   ˚           1˚ ˚

can switch to ONBs of the form pf1 ˆ 1λ11 qf11 , pf2 ˆ 1λ12 qf21 , e1˚
                                                                    1 p1µ11 ˆ e1 q, e2 p1µ12 ˆ e2 q. The
                                                                               ˚     1˚         ˚

effect of this change on fig. 56 is shown in fig. 57, using also a sequence of braiding-fusion
moves.
    Likewise, the effect of these changes on fig. 54 and fig. 55 is shown in the second panel
of fig. 58 which also includes the result of fig. 57 (with a similar relation for 1 Ø 2).
    In the second panel in fig. 58, we obtain from the dashed bubbles on the left side
Kronecker delta’s δe1 ,f2 δe2 ,f1 . Using these delta’s and taking the rightmost wire diagrams


                                                                             61
                                    t2‘                            s2‘                                          t2‘                               s2‘

                                               t2‘           s2‘                                                            t2‘           s2‘

              Σ
              s2‘, s2‘‘
                              πL      2

                                                                              = Σ          s2‘, s2‘‘
                                                                                                               πL   2

                                                                                                                               t
                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                                          s
              t2, t2‘‘                         t‘‘           s‘‘                           t2, t2‘‘
                                                                                                                            t2‘‘           s2‘‘
                                               2              2
                                                                                           s, t, A

                                    t2‘‘                           s2‘‘                                         t2‘‘                              s2‘‘




                             t2‘                                                    s2‘

                              t2‘                                                   s2‘

        = Σ   s2‘, s2‘‘
                                           t         A                    A   s
              t2‘, t2‘‘
              s, t, A        t2‘‘                                                   s2‘‘

                             t2‘‘                                                   s2‘‘




        = Σ                                t         A                    A   s
              s, t, A




                          Figure 48: Manipulation of the middle part of fig. 47.

apart via a new summation over w12 , w22 yields the second panel in fig. 59.
    We now reverse the steps fig. 54 and fig. 55 on the two leftmost square diagrams in
the lower panel of fig. 59. Finally, we insert this into fig. 50, remembering that we are
allowed to eliminate the projectors P Li ´2 in fig. 50 in terms of identity operators. This
yields the diagram for the operator sum on the right side of (159) with the structure
constants
                         ν 2 ,ρ2 ,w2 ,w2
                                                          ÿ w2            w2
                        cν 1 ,ρ1 ,w1 1,w1 2;ν,ρ;w1 ,w2 :“  ζe,f1 ;w1 ,w1 ζf ˚2,e˚ ;w2 ,w1 . (179)
                                                     1   2                                                 1                      2
                                                                              e,f

But the ζ-structure constants (170) differ from the η-structure constants (102) only by
a braiding operator which is unitary and hence gives a unitary change of ONB in the
respective intertwiner spaces. So we can replace the ζ-structure constants with the η-
structure constants.
   5) Consider the operator

                                      pQµL11,λ1 b QµL22,λ2 qΨLν,ρ;w
                                                                1 ,L2
                                                                    1 ,w2
                                                                          pQLµ11,λ1 b QLµ12,λ1 q.                                                        (180)
                                                                                                       1   1            2   2


                                                                              62
                            t2                                                       s2

                      f2                                                                      e2
                                                                                                                                            t2                                                      s2
                            t2‘                                                      s2‘
                                                                                                                                  f2                                                                        e2
                                                       t2‘                  s2‘

          Σ                 πL      2
                                                                                                             =                                                        P L -2      2

          t2‘, t2‘‘
                                                       t2‘‘                 s2‘‘
          s2‘, s2‘‘                                                                                                                                                                                         e2‘
                                                                                                                                  f2‘
                            t 2
                               ‘‘                                                    s  ‘‘
                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                            t2‘‘‘                                                   s2‘‘‘
                      f2‘                                                                     e2‘

                            t2‘‘‘                                                   s2‘‘‘




                                          Figure 49: Result of manipulations on fig. 48.


                                                 Σ
                                        v1‘, v2‘, ti, si, ti‘‘‘, si‘‘‘
                                                                             ζ     v1
                                                                                   e1 f1; w v1‘         ζ    v2
                                                                                                             e2 f2; w v2‘             ζ     v1‘
                                                                                                                                            e1‘ f1‘; w ‘v1‘‘          ζ   v2‘
                                                                                                                                                                          e2‘ f2‘; w ‘v2‘‘

                                            ei, ti, ei‘, ti‘




                                                                            v1                                                                                 v2
                                            π   L1
                                                                                                                                  π   L2



                                                                     t1            s1                                                                  t2             s2

                                               t1                                                 s1                                  t2                                              s2

                                f1                                                                     e1                   f2                                                                e2


                                                                   P L -2   1
                                                                                                                                                      P L -2   2


                                f1‘                                                                    e1‘                  f2‘                                                               e2‘

                                               t1‘‘‘                                          s1‘‘‘                                t2‘‘‘                                              s2‘‘‘

                                                                    t1‘‘‘            s1‘‘‘                                                            t2‘‘‘            s2‘‘‘

                                             πL    1
                                                                                                                                  πL    2




                                                                            v1‘‘                                                                               v2‘‘




                                          Figure 50: Result of manipulations on fig. 49.

We recall the representation QLµ,ν “ π L pqµ,ν q and the graphical expression for qµ,ν , in
the double triangle algebra, fig. 26. We insert this into fig. 47, use the representation

                                                                                                               63
                                 v2                                            v2
          Σ        π   L2
                                                       = Σ       π   L2



                            t2        s2                                  t2        s2



                   t2                      s2                   t2                       s2



                            P L -22
                                                                          P L -2
                                                                               2




                  t2‘‘‘                    s2‘‘‘                t2‘                      s2‘


                                                                t2‘                      s2‘




                                                                t2‘‘‘                    s2‘‘‘




                                                   Figure 51:

property of π Li , the relations in the double triangle algebra ♦, and [58], lem. 6.2. Then
we see that in the sum over intertwiners ei , fi as in (162) only such terms survive such
that the values of µi , λi , µ1i , λ1i are equal to the values prescribed by the projections Q in
(180). This is equivalent to the claimed fusion property in 5).

4.2    Classification of defects
According to thm. 3, 4) the defect algebra DL1 ,L2 associated with a bi-partite closed
spin chain with subsystems of lengths L1 , L2 is abelian and its structure constants are
independent of L1 , L2 . This means that the defect algebra is a representation of a universal
object. In fact, it is precisely isomorphic to the algebra classifying transparent boundaries
in 1+1 dimensional CFTs [5, 60], see sec. 2.10:
Theorem 4. The defect algebra DL1 ,L2 associated with a bi-partite spin chain with sub-
systems of lengths L1 , L2 is a representation of pB ` q1 X B ` , where B ` is the extension
of N b N opp defined by the braided product Q-system Z1 rXs ˆ` Z2 rXs with Zi rXs “
pθRi , xRi , wRi q, i “ 1, 2 two copies of the full center Q-system of N XN .
Proof. This statement is implicit in the proof of [60], prop. 4.19. First we recall the

                                                       64
                                                                            v2

                                                  πL      2

                                                                     u2‘         u2‘
                                                               t2                          s2




                                                                    t2               s2

                               = Σ                πL      2

                                                                       u2        u2
                                                                    t2‘            s2‘



                                                  t2‘                                           s2‘




                                                  t2‘‘‘                                         s2‘‘‘




                                                Figure 52:

generators of pB ` q1 X B ` . By the general relation between Q-systems and extensions, B `
is pointwise equal to N V ` , with N P N bN opp and with V ˘ obeying the relations (33) for
X ` as in (40) for our two isomorphic copies of the full center Q-system. To be precise,
denoting l “ pλ, µ, vq, ¯l “ pλ̄, µ̄, v̄q and by Tl P N b N opp a set of isometries obeying
the
ř Cuntz algebra          relations (with  µ, λ P N XN , v P Hompαλ` , αµ´ q), we may set θR1 “
                   qTl˚ and θR2 “ l Tl̄ pλ̄ b µ̄opp qTl̄˚ . By [60], lem. 4.5, the center pB ` q1 X B `
               opp
                                   ř
   l Tl pλ b µ
is generated as a vector space by P ` V ` , where P ` P Hompid, θR1 θR2 q X N b N opp . A
basis of such P ` is given by
                            `
                           Pλ,µ;v1 ,v2
                                       :“ pr̄λ˚ b pr̄µopp q˚ qTµ,λ,v
                                                               ˚
                                                                      θ pTµ̄,˚ λ̄,v̄2 q,
                                                                     1 1
                                                                                                        (181)

with µ, λ P N XN and vi an ONB of Hompαλ` , αµ´ q. So, a set of generators of the center
pB ` q1 X B ` is
                             Bλ,µ,v1 ,v2 “ Pλ,µ;v1 ,v2 V ` .                       (182)
It is now straightforward to use the Q-system calculus, (33) and (40), and the definition
of the full center Q-system ZrXs. Then it is found that
                                                     λ2 ,µ2 ,v 2 ,v 2
                                                  ÿ
                  Bλ,µ,v1 ,v2 Bλ1 ,µ1 ,v11 ,v21 “   dλ1 ,µ1 ,v1 1,v1 2;λ,µ;v1 ,v2 Bλ2 ,µ2 ,v12 ,v22 (183)
                                                                                 1     2
                                               λ2 ,µ2 ,v12 ,v22


                                                              65
                                                                                       v2

                                                         πL      2
                                                                                 u2‘        u2‘
                                                                                 u2         u2
                                                                           t2‘                     s2‘



                                     = Σ                 t2‘                                             s2‘




                                                         t2‘‘‘                                           s2‘‘‘




                                                                                       v2

                                                           πL        2




                                                                                 t2‘         s2‘


                                     = Σ                  t2‘                                             s2‘




                                                         t2‘‘‘                                           s2‘‘‘




                                                       Figure 53:

for the structure constants d given by
                  λ2 ,µ2 ,v 2 ,v 2                                        v2                v̄ 2
                                                                                                                     (184)
                                                  ř                                                    2    2 ´1
                dλ1 ,µ1 ,v1 1,v1 2;λ,µ;v1 ,v2 “   e1 ,e2 ,f1 ,f2 ηe1 ,f1 ;v1 v 1 ηe2 ,f2 ;v̄2 v̄ 1 rdpµ qdpλ qs
                                                                   1               2
                           1   2                                                       1                         2

            rp1µ ˆ ε` pµ1 , µ̄q ˆ 1µ̄1 qpf1 ˆ f2 qrµ2 s˚ p1λ ˆ ε´ pλ1 , λ̄q ˆ 1λ̄1 qpe1 ˆ e2 qrλ2

where e1 , e2 , f1 , f2 run over ONBs of Hompλλ1 , λ2 q, Hompλ̄λ̄1 , λ̄2 q, Hompµµ1 , µ2 q, Hompµ̄µ̄1 , µ̄2 q,
respectively. The second line is dpµ2 qdpλ2 q if e2 “ ε´ pλ̄, λ̄1 qē1 and f2 “ ε` pµ̄, µ̄1 qf¯1 and
zero otherwise, by a set of braiding-fusion moves and by using the definition of the
conjugate intertwiners. Thus, the structure constants are (writing out the η-structure


                                                                         66
                                                                               s1*                      t2*
                         s1                        t2

                              e1             f2                       μ1 e *
                                                                          1                                   λ2
                                                                                            ν
                                                                                                    f2
                                                                      μ1‘
                                                          =                      e1‘*                         λ‘2
                                                                                            ν‘
                                                                                                    f2‘
                              e1‘            f2‘                      μ   ‘‘
                                                                          1
                                                                                                              λ‘‘2
                         s‘
                          1
                                                   t2‘
                                                                               s1‘                      t2‘




                                                         Figure 54:

                                                                               s2*                      t1*
                         s2                        t1

                              e2             f1                       μ2 e *
                                                                          2                                   λ1
                                                                                                    f1
                                                                      μ2‘
                                                          =                      e2‘*
                                                                                                ‘
                                                                                                              λ‘1
                                                                                                    f1
                                                                                                      ‘


                              e‘             f1‘                      μ2‘‘
                               2
                                                                                                              λ‘‘1
                         s‘
                          2
                                                   t1
                                                     ‘

                                                                               s2‘                      t1‘




                                                         Figure 55:

constants)
      ÿ „ dpµqdpµ2 qdpλqdpλ2 q 1{2
  “                                    Erf¯˚ ε´ pµ̄, µ̄1 q˚ pv̄2 ˆ v̄21 qε` pλ̄, λ̄1 qēpv̄22 q˚ sErf ˚ pv1 ˆ v11 qepv12 q˚ s.   (185)
      e,f
             dpµ1 qdpλ1 qdpθq2

 By writing out the definition of the conjugate endomorphisms, using the functoriality
condition 2) of alpha induction, and using the conjugacy relations, we arrive at,

              Erf¯˚ ε´ pµ̄, µ̄1 q˚ pv̄2 ˆ v̄21 qε` pλ̄, λ̄1 qēpv̄22 q˚ s “ Ere˚ ppv2 q˚ ˆ pv21 q˚ qf v22 s.                     (186)

A comparison of (183) with (159) then shows that the map

                                              Bλ,µ,v1 ,v2 ÞÑ ΨLλ,µ,v
                                                                1 ,L2
                                                                    1 ,v
                                                                         ˚                                                       (187)
                                                                                        2


is an algebra representation.
  By [5], thm. 4.44 we have a description of pB ` q1 XB ` in terms of the objects A P M XM ;
more precisely for each A one can construct in a canonical way a minimal projection

                                                              67
                                                            e*i                                               ei‘*

                              Σ                wi f vi
                                                   i
                                                                                               w i‘ f ‘ vi‘
                                                                                                     i
                                                                                                                                =
                               vi‘
                                                          v    i
                                                                ‘*                                            v     i
                                                                                                                     ‘‘*




                                         ζ      vi
                                               ei fi; wi vi‘             ×               ζ     vi‘
                                                                                              ei‘ fi;‘ wi‘ vi‘‘




                                                                               ei‘*

                                                                                  e*i
                              =                                      wi w i‘             vi
                                                                           fi‘ fi
                                                                               vi‘‘*




                                                        Figure 56:


                                              ei‘*                                                                       ei‘*

                                                 e*i                                              e*i

                                     wi wi‘            vi                                              wi wi‘ vi
                                          fi ‘ fi                                                     fi          fi ‘
                                              vi‘‘*                                                                   vi‘‘*




                                                                                              ei‘*
                                                                                                      e*i
                                                                               vi wi‘ wi

                                                      =                                               fi

                                                                                               fi ‘
                                                                                      vi‘‘*




                                                        Figure 57:

pA P pB ` q1 X B ` . The element DA L1 ,L2
                                           P DL1 ,L2 corresponding to pA under the above
representation (187) is a projection operator acting on Vopen      L1
                                                                       b Vopen
                                                                           L2
                                                                               which by definition
must be of the form
                                     ÿ
                         DAL1 ,L2
                                  “        ξA;ν,ρ,w1 ,w2 ΨLν,ρ;w
                                                             1 ,L2
                                                                 1 ,w2
                                                                                             (188)
                                          ν,ρ,w1 ,w2

for certain complex numbers ξA;ν,ρ,w1 ,w2 . These complex numbers are in principle deter-

                                                                         68
                 e1*                          ν                                               e2*

                 e1‘*
                                              ν‘
                                                                       f2
                                                                                              e2‘*                       ‘
                                                                                                                                                   f1                         Π ζ                               vi
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ei fi; wi vi‘    ζ        vi‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ei‘ fi;‘ wi‘ vi‘‘
                                                                                                                                                                              i = 1, 2
                                                                       f2‘                                                                         f1‘



                 e1‘*                                                                     e2‘*                                                                                    e2‘*                                                      e1‘*
                                 e1*                     ν                                                e2*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e1*
      =                                                          f2                                                                 f1
                                                                                                                                                                                e2*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               v1 w1 w            ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1


                                       ν‘                               f2‘                                     ‘                                    f1‘                          w2 w2‘ v2                                                        f1
                                                                                                                                                                                f2           f2
                                                                                                                                                                                               ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               f1 ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                  v2‘‘*                         v1‘‘*




                                                                                                Figure 58:


                                                                                                                                        e2‘*                                                          e1‘*
                                                                                                                                                                                                              f2*
                                                                                                                                   e2*
            e1‘*                                                             e2‘*                                                                                               v1 w1 w1‘
      =                                ν ‘‘                                                          ‘‘

                                                             f
                                                             2
                                                              ‘*                                                f   1
                                                                                                                     ‘
                                                                                                                                    w2 w v2          ‘
                                                                                                                                                     2                                                        e2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          δe ,f δe ,f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1    2                  2        1

                                                                                                                                   f2          f2
                                                                                                                                                 ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                        f1‘
                                                                                                                                                     v2‘‘*                            v1‘‘*



                                                                                                                                                   e2‘*                                          e1‘*               e*2                                     f2*
                        e   ‘*                                                      e‘*                                                                                         v1 w             ‘‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           v2 w             ‘

     =Σ                                           ν ‘‘                                                    ‘‘
                            1                                                        2                                                                                                           1                                                          2
                                                                                                                                               w2‘‘ v2                                                        w1 w1‘
                                                                      f2‘*                                                   f1‘                                                                  f1‘                                                       e2
          w ‘‘                                                                                                                                          f‘                                                          f
                                                                                                                                                   v‘‘2 2                             v1‘‘                     w2‘‘ 2                          w2‘‘



                                                                                    δe ,f δe ,f
                                                                                          1      2        2     1
                                                                                                                             ×                 ζ          v2
                                                                                                                                                         e2‘ f2‘; w2‘‘ v2‘‘    ζ       v1
                                                                                                                                                                                      e1‘ f1‘; w1‘‘ v1‘‘




                                                                                                Figure 59:

mined by [5], thm. 4.44 and are universal, i.e. independent of L1 , L2 or the dynamics on
the spin-chain. In general, it seems nontrivial to determine them from data that are di-
rectly accessible, so we will leave this problem to a future work. If we have the projections
DAL1 ,L2
         , we can write

            Vopen b Vopen            VAL1 ,L2 , VAL1 ,L2 :“ DA             b Vopen      (189)
              L1      L2
                               à                             L1 ,L2    L1      L2
                          “                                         pVopen         q.
                                                             AP M XM


The subspaces VAL1 ,L2 determine a specific boundary condition A fusing the two chains

                                                                                                               69
L1 , L2 together. By thm. 3, 3) these subspaces are invariant under the action of any local
operator which does not act on the endpoint of the two chains.

4.3    Special cases: abelian fusion in M
There is an interesting special case, still covering many examples, where the determination
of the coefficients ξA;ν,ρ,w1 ,w2 in (188) is possible, namely when all Zν,ρ P t0, 1u. Then,
since the horizontal center Zh is isomorphic to the fusion ring M XM , and since the
direct summands of Zh are matrix algebras of size Zν,ρ , it follows that M XM is abelian,
i.e. NA,BC        C
              “ NB,A   in particular ( N XN by assumption is always abelian because we
assume that it is braided). In such a situation, the pairs pν, ρq such that Zν,ρ “ 1 are
one-to-one
         ř correspondence with the simple objects A P M XM . In fact, since we have
Zν,ρ “ B xαν` , Byxαρ´ , By, with xαλ˘ , By “ dimHompαλ˘ , Bq, we may assign to pν, ρq that
unique B corresponding to the only summand which is “ 1.
     In particular, we may diagonalize the fusion coefficients NA,B         C
                                                                              . Furthermore, since
Zν,ρ “ dimHompαρ´ , αν` q P t0, 1u, we have no need for the degeneracy indices w1 , w2 so
that we may write write ΨLν,ρ1 ,L2 for the MPOs generating the defect algebra. By [60], sec.
5.4, the coefficients (188) are proportional to the inverse of the matrices diagonalizing
   C
NA,B   . By lem. 2, 1) and 3), the latter are in turn given by the coefficients Yλ,µ,A given in
fig. 27 . Combining these results gives
                                          dA ÿ
                               DAL1 ,L2
                                        “ 2 4     dν dρ Yν,ρ,A ΨLν,ρ1 ,L2 .                  (190)
                                         DX d ν,ρ

At any rate, this makes the determination of the DA
                                                  L1 ,L2
                                                         a feasible problem, because NA,B
                                                                                      C

is known from the start.
   In the case of a diagonal fusion category N XN ,
                                            Zν,ρ “ δν,ρ ,                                   (191)
we have |N XN | “ |M XM | and δν,ρ “ B xαν` , Byxαρ´ , By meaning that pxαλ˘ , AyqλPN XN ,APM XM
                                        ř
are permutation matrices which are inverses of each other, setting up a bijection be-
tween the simple objects in N XN and M XM . Due to the homomorphism property of
α-induction, either one of these isomorphisms transforms the Nµ,ν  σ
                                                                     fusion coefficients to
the NA,B fusion coefficients.
      C

   The defect operators Ψν,νL1 ,L2
                                   may be labelled by A P M XM under this isomorphism,
so we may write ΨA . As a special case of (159), their OPE is (after a suitable renor-
                   L1 ,L2

malization of the generators)
                                                 ÿ
                               ΨAL1 ,L2 L1 ,L2
                                       ΨB      “    C
                                                   NA,B ΨLC1 ,L2 ,                     (192)
                                                   C
so is an isomorphic copy of the abelian fusion product in M XM . Thus, in this special
case, the defect algebra DL1 ,L2 is an isomorphic copy of this fusion ring. By contrast to
the MPOs OA     L
                  , which also yield an algebra isomorphic to the fusion ring of M XM by
(110), thm. 1, the MPOs ΨA     L1 ,L2
                                      act on a bipartite chain. Therefore, by contrast to the
former, we think of them as corresponding to vertical, instead of horizontal, defects.
    Note that for non-diagonal theories, the fusion ring of M XM can be non-abelian, while
D L1 ,L2
         is always abelian. Thus, in general, the horizontal defect algebra (the OAL
                                                                                     s) is not
isomorphic to our vertical defect algebra (the Ψν,ρ;w1 ,w2 ).
                                                    L1 ,L2



                                                 70
5     Conclusions
In this paper we have explored some connections between subfactor theory, braided uni-
tary fusion categories, CFTs in 1 ` 1 dimensions, defects, and anyonic spin chains. Future
work should address the following points:

    • We have not addressed at all the analytic question of scaling limits of anyonic spin
      chains. To what extent will the close analogy between the defect algebra in on the
      spin-chain and of the CFTs – observed here at a purely algebraic level for finite
      chains – persist in such a scaling limit?

    • Our defect operators on the spin-chains have, after all, a fairly complicated struc-
      ture. What simplifications can be obtained in simple cases such as the anyonic
      chain built upon the Ising fusion category?

    • If one already knows that the fusion categories used as an input into the anyonic
      chain construction came from a CFT, such as e.g. arising from the positive energy
      highest weight representations of a Virasoro algebra in the case the minimal models:
      Can the vacuum state of the CFT be used to obtain an approximation of the ground
      state for the anyonic chain?



    Acknowledgements: I thank Henning Rehren and Yasu Kawahigashi for their edu-
cational emails related to subfactors and CFTs, and Laurens Lootens, Alex Stottmeister
and Frank Verstraete for explanations regarding anyonic spin chains. I am grateful to the
Max-Planck Society for supporting the collaboration between MPI-MiS and Leipzig U.,
grant Proj. Bez. M.FE.A.MATN0003, and to Thomas Endler from MPI-MiS, Leipzig, for
help with figures.


A      Inclusions associated with finite groups
Let N Ă M be an irreducible inclusion of factors such that γpMq1 X M “ N11 X M is
abelian with dimension n “ rM : N s. [72] has shown that N “ Mα , where g ÞÑ αg
is an action of a finite group G of order n by outer automorphisms acting on M. This
situation is in principle very well-understood, see e.g. [67] who uses the Cuntz-algebra
picture. Here we work out the situation totally explicitily from the Q-system perspective
as an illustration of this concept for the reader without a background in subfactor theory.
    A. By the general theory since M “ N v point-wise there must exist a unique ug P N
such that
                                   αg pvq “ ug v, ug P N .                            (193)
Using αg αh pvq “ αgh pvq and αg pvq˚ “ αg pv ˚ q or αg pv 2 q “ rαg pvqs2 respectively, we find

                        ug uh “ ugh ,   u˚g r “ θpug qr,   xug θpug q “ ug x,               (194)

with r “ xw P Hompθ2 , idq. Using αg pnq “ n, n P N , we also find rug , θpN qs “ 0 so
ug P Hompθ, θqXN . Also, θ “ jN jM |N “ jN1 jN |N , so θpN q “ N2 and hence ug P N21 XN .

                                               71
   B. We can rewrite the decomposition θ – ‘i ρi where a given sector may appear
multiple times, as θ – ‘π dπ ¨ ρπ , where dπ is the multiplicity of the irreducible sector ρπ .
The corresponding intertwiners are wπa , a “ 1, . . . , dπ , and
                                              dπ
                                             ÿÿ
                                  θpnq “             wπa ρπ pnqwπa˚ .                    (195)
                                             π a“1

It follows from the intertwiner calculus that
                       Dπ pgqba “ wπa˚ ug wπb P N X Hompρ̄π , ρ̄π q “ C1,                (196)
can be identified with complex numbers, and the dπ ˆ dπ matrices Dπ pgqba form an irre-
ducible representation of G which transforms the fields ψπa :“ wπa˚ v as in
                                                 dπ
                                                 ÿ
                                   αg pψπb q “         Dπ pgqba ψπa .                    (197)
                                                 a“1

One can equip the linear space Kπ “ spanC tψπa : a “ 1, . . . , dπ u with a scalar product
pφ1 , φ2 qπ 1 “ φ˚1 φ2 because the latter operator is an intertwiner in Hompid, idq which is
at the same time in M hence in N 1 X M “ C1. Then it follows that the numerical
matrices Dπ pgqba give a unitary operator Dπ pgq on Kπ which implements αg pφq “ Dπ pgqφ
(unitarity because φ˚1 φ2 “ αg pφ1 q˚ αg pφ2 q from αg p1q “ 1.) Thus, ug itself
                                           dπ
                                         ÿ ÿ
                                  ug “             Dπ pgqba wπa wπb˚                     (198)
                                         π a,b“1

is unitary. Thus π corresponds to the unitary irreducible representations of G, with
characters
                                         dπ
                                         ÿ
                                χπ pgq “    Dπ pgqaa .                         (199)
                                                 a“1
   C. Now let
                                      u1g “ jN pug q P N 1 .                             (200)
The unitaries u1g P N 1 also form a representation of G. For the minimal expectation
E 1 : N 1 Ñ M1 we calculate
                                       1                  1
                           E 1 pu1g q “ w1˚ γ 1 pu1g qw1 “ jM pv ˚ ug vq                 (201)
                                       d                  d
using w1 “ jM pvq. Since ug P Hompθ, θq, v P Hompθ, idq, we must have v ˚ ug v P N 1 X M “
C1. To compute this number, we apply again E, since Epv ˚ ug vq “ v ˚ ug v,
                                           dπ
                                         ÿ ÿ
                              ˚
                          Epv ug vq “              Dπ pgqba Epv ˚ wπa wπb˚ vq
                                         π a,b“1
                                           dπ
                                         ÿ ÿ                  dimpρ̄π q a                (202)
                                     “             Dπ pgqba            δb
                                         π a,b“1
                                                                 d
                                         ÿ            dπ
                                     “       χπ pgq      “ d ¨ δ1,g .
                                         π
                                                      d

                                                 72
Thus, E 1 pu1g q “ δ1,g .
   D. Let e ” eM1 “ rM1 ηs “ d´1 ¨ vv ˚ P M X N11 be the Jones projection for the
extension N1 Ă N . (Since jN peN1 q “ eN1 and jN pN1 q “ M1 we have eN1 “ eM1 .) Then
Epeq “ d´2 1. On the other hand

                         1 “d2 ¨ Epeq “ d2 ¨ jN pEpeqq “ d ¨ jN pEpvv ˚ qq
                                    ˜                ¸
                              d       ÿ
                           “     jN      αg pvv ˚ q
                             |G|       g
                              d  ÿ
                           “        jN pug vv ˚ u˚g q
                             |G| g                                                    (203)
                              d2 ÿ 1
                           “        ug jN pequ1˚
                                               g
                             |G| g
                             ÿ
                           “ u1g eu1˚g
                               g


since |G| “ d2 On the other hand, for any n1 P N ,
                                     ÿ                 ÿ
                      n1 e “ 1n1 e “   u1g eu1˚
                                             g  n1
                                                   e “   u1g E 1 pu1˚ 1
                                                                   g n qe             (204)
                                           g               g


in view of E 1 pn1 qe “ en1 e, and so
                                   ÿ
                              n1 “    u1g m1g ,   m1g “ E 1 pu1˚ 1    1
                                                              g nq P M.               (205)
                                     g


By E 1 pu1g q “ δ1,g this representation n1 “ g u1g m1g is unique.
                                              ř
    E. By construction αg peq P M and since αg pN1 q “ N1 pointwise, also αg peq P N11 .
Now jN fixes M X N11 , so jN pαg peqq P M X N1 . Since e “ d´1 ¨ vv ˚ and since we have
                                                              g ” eg P M X N1 . By the Jones
αg pvq “ ug v, u1g “ jN pug q, and jN peq “ e, we have u1g eu1˚              1

basic construction, N1 “ N _ teu, M “ N _ teu, so in particular ug Mu1˚
                           1     1                                         1
                                                                                g “ M and
hence also ug M ug “ M . In conclusion, we have N “ M _ tug u, and the properties
               1    1 1˚      1                             1      1    1

of the u1g and of E 1 in D show that this is crossed product of M1 by an action of G. We
may thus say that
                                   N “ Mα , N 1 “ M1 ¸α1 G,                            (206)
where αg1 pm1 q “ u1g m1 u1˚
                           g is an
                                 ř action of G on M .
                                                      1

      F. By (203) and E, 1 “ g eg . Recall that M X N11 is abelian of dimension |G|. Thus,
the eg are commuting projections. They are either pairwise distinct or eg “ e for all g
which is not possible so the eg are the minimal projections for M X N11 .
      G. α1 is also an action on M, and by u1g P N 1 , we have N Ă Mα Ă M. However since
                                                                      1


N 1 X M, this action is outer and hence rN : Ms “ |G| “ rMα : Ms, thus Mα “ N .
                                                                    1               1


Then, we may repeat the same procedures A–F with potentially new ũ1g P N 1 . By D, F
        g “ eg and thus ug ũg ” wg P teu so wg P M . Thus, the above statements remain
ũ1g eũ1˚                  1˚ 1    1      1     1      1

true with obvious modifications if we replace α by α1
      We can summarize the situation as follows:


                                                   73
Proposition 1. Let N Ă M be an irreducible inclusion of factors such that γpMq1 X M
is abelian with dimension n “ rM : N1 s. Then there exist a finite group G of order n
and tu1g : g P Gu Ă N 1 such that

    1. g ÞÑ u1g is a unitary representation of G.
                                                                                      ř
    2. N 1 “ M1 _ tu1g : g P Gu and each n1 P N 1 is representable uniquely as n1 “          1  1
                                                                                          g ug mg
       with m1g P M1 .

    3. m ÞÑ u1g mu1˚
                   g is an outer action of G transforming M to itself. Its fixed points are
       exactly the elements from N .

    4. M “řN _ tψπa : π P Ĝ, a “ 1, . . . , dπ u and each m P M is uniquely representable as
       m “ π,a naπ ψπa with naπ P N . ψπa are scaled isometries with pψπa q˚ ψπa “ pdπ {dq1.

    5. For any g P G:
                                                    dπ
                                                    ÿ
                                     u1g ψπb u1˚
                                              g “         Dπ pgqba ψπa .                   (207)
                                                    a“1

       where Dπ is an irreducible representation of dimension dπ .
                                                1   1   1
    6. The canonical expectations
        1 1                 a
                                 ? E : M Ñ N , E : N Ñ M are given respectively by
       E pug q “ δ1,g 1, Epψπ q “ d δπ,0 1.


B      PEPs and double triangle algebra
We represent an MPO OA     L
                             as an elementary cell as in fig. 31 for some fixed chosen, e.g.
L “ 8. Considering a number of such a elementary building block, we build a network
as indicated in fig. 60 by concatenating the outer legs of each cell, where for our choice
L “ 8 we have an octagonal lattice.Such a network can be considered as a tensor with a
very large number of indices given by the labels carried by the uncontracted inner lines of
each cell. For each elementary cell, we have an index A P M XM . Each index A associated
with a cell is now summed, weighted by the coefficient dA , thereby effectively inserting
a projector P L “ QLid,id as in fig. 61 into each cell. Such a structure, proposed in [29]
is called a “PEPS” (projected entangled pair-) state. In principle, we could have taken
the pair pµ, νq to be different for each cell, but we will see from the next “pull-through”
lemma that in such a case the PEPS is zero.
     We can also insert a string corresponding to a representer of the double triangle
algebra such as OA into the PEPS as shown in fig. 62. The precise location of the string
is irrelevant, again by the “pull-through” property of [29]:

Proposition 2. We have the pull-through identity in fig. 62.

Proof. A graphical proof is given by [29], but it is not so clear to us how their assump-
tions precisely correspond to our setting. So we argue instead as follows. First, the
zipper lemma implies that the pull through property is equivalent to the equality shown
graphically in fig. 63. Here and in the following, we put arrows on the cells to see more
clearly that the tensor contractions implied by the connected lines are well-defined, i.e.
over indices in the correct intertwiner spaces. Then we contract suitable legs with UB

                                              74
             ...                                                                                   ...

             ...                                                                                   ...




                           UA        ŪA                              UB         ŪB


             ...                                                                                   ...



                                                             ŪB
                   ŪA




                                                 UA




                                                                                             UB
             ...                                                                                   ...
                                                             UB
                   UA




                                                  ŪA




                                                                                             ŪB
                           ŪA       UA                              ŪB         UB

                            ..        ..                              ..          ..
                             .         .                               .           .

                     Figure 60: Schematic diagram for the PEPS.

                                                               UA          ŪA
                                                   ŪA




                                                                                       UA




                                 ř
                         PL “    A dA
                                                    UA




                                                                                       ŪA




                                                               ŪA         UA


Figure 61: Schematic diagram for the insertion of the MPO P L into a cell. Here L “ 8.

and use the duality and unitarity of the 6j-symbols as in lemma 1. This turns the desired
equality into fig. 64. Thus, we need to show the equality between the middle and lower
panel in fig. 64. This equality holds true by an orthogonality property of the zipper
tensors, with ONBs
                                           t8 P HomM pa3 , Ca1 , q,
                                           t18 P HomM pa13 , Ca1 q,
                                           t3 P HomM pa2 , Ba1 q,
                                                                                                         (208)
                                           t15 P HomM pa2 , Aa1 q,
                                           t5 P HomM pa2 , Aa1 q,
                                           t0 P HomM pC, ABq,

                                                        75
                                                        UA          UA


                                                        UB              UB




                                            UA


                                                  UB




                                                                                 UB
                                                                  dB
                                                             Σ
                                                             B
                                                               d   A




                                            UA


                                                  UB




                                                                                 UB
                                                        UB              UB


                                                        UA              UA




                                                  UB         UB
                                             UB




                                                                    UB



                                                                                      UA
                                                        dB
                                   =
                                                      Σ
                                                      B
                                                        d  A
                                             UB




                                                                    UB



                                                                                      UA
                                                  UB         UB




                Figure 62: The pull-through property described in [29].

and ai , a1i P M XN , A, B, C P M XM :
                               ¨              ˛        ¨                        ˛
            ÿ ÿ dA                     t3                         t3
                           C                      C
                         Y A,B ˝t0 ;        t8 ‚Y A,B ˝t0 ;                  t18 ‚ “ δt5 ,t15 δt8 ,t18 δa3 ,a13 ,   (209)
                    dC
             B t ,t
                3 0                    t5                         t15

which follows from repeated application of Frobenius duality. This implies the statement.


    Instead of inserting P L into each cell, we could also think of inserting QLµ,ν , which
also is a projection (cor. 1). Thus, in a sense, we would get a different “sector” for every
choice of QLµ,ν , and furthermore, the standard choice P L proposed by [29] and investigated
further by [39, 40] is included by putting µ “ ν “ id. We think that it is worthwhile
investigating such constructions further.




                                                  76
                                      UA                         UA
                                  A                                         A
                         dB
                    Σ   d
                   B,D,t A
                              D
                                  t                                     t
                                                                                D
                                  B   UB        UB      UB       UB         B



                     =


                                                UA      UA
                         dD
                    Σ
                    D
                      d   A

                                      UD        UD      UD       UD




              Figure 63: Equivalent form of the pull through property.

References
[1] F. Wilczek, “Quantum mechanics of fractional-spin particles,” Physical review letters,
    vol. 49, no. 14, p. 957, 1982.

[2] E. Rowell, R. Stong, and Z. Wang, “On classification of modular tensor categories,”
    Communications in Mathematical Physics, vol. 292, no. 2, pp. 343–389, 2009.

[3] B. Bakalov and A. A. Kirillov, Lectures on tensor categories and modular functors,
    vol. 21. American Mathematical Soc., 2001.

[4] J. Fröhlich, J. Fuchs, I. Runkel, and C. Schweigert, “Correspondences of ribbon
    categories,” Advances in Mathematics, vol. 199, no. 1, pp. 192–329, 2006.

[5] M. Bischoff, Y. Kawahigashi, R. Longo, and K.-H. Rehren, Tensor categories and
    endomorphisms of von Neumann algebras: With applications to quantum field theory,
    vol. 3. Springer, 2015.

[6] P. Etingof, D. Nikshych, and V. Ostrik, “On fusion categories,” Annals of Mathe-
    matics, pp. 581–642, 2005.

[7] G. Moore and N. Seiberg, “Classical and quantum conformal field theory,” Commu-
    nications in Mathematical Physics, vol. 123, no. 2, pp. 177–254, 1989.

[8] G. Moore and N. Seiberg, “Lectures on rcft,” in Physics, geometry and topology,
    pp. 263–361, Springer, 1990.


                                           77
                                             UA        UA      UA            UA
                                    A                                                  A
                           dB
                      Σ   d
                     B,D,t A
                                D
                                    t                                                  t
                                                                                               D
                                    B        UB        UB      UB            UB            B



                       =

                                                           A       A
                           dB
                      Σ   d
                     B,D,t A
                                        UD        UD
                                                       D
                                                           t   t
                                                                    D
                                                                        UD        UD

                                                           B   B


                      =


                           dD
                     Σ
                     D
                       d    A
                                        UD        UD                    UD        UD




Figure 64: Upper panel: Equivalent form of the upper panel in fig. 63 after contracting
into suitable legs of a 6j-symbol. Middle panel: Obtained from upper panel by zipper
lemma. Lower panel: Equivalent form of the lower panel in fig. 63 after contracting into
suitable legs of a 6j symbol, using duality and unitarity.

 [9] K. Fredenhagen, K.-H. Rehren, and B. Schroer, “Superselection sectors with braid
     group statistics and exchange algebras,” Communications in Mathematical Physics,
     vol. 125, no. 2, pp. 201–226, 1989.

[10] K. Fredenhagen, K.-H. Rehren, and B. Schroer, “Superselection sectors with braid
     group statistics and exchange algebras ii: Geometric aspects and conformal covari-
     ance,” Reviews in Mathematical Physics, vol. 4, no. spec01, pp. 113–157, 1992.

[11] E. Witten, “Quantum field theory and the jones polynomial,” Communications in
     Mathematical Physics, vol. 121, no. 3, pp. 351–399, 1989.

[12] J. Fuchs, I. Runkel, and C. Schweigert, “Tft construction of rcft correlators i: Parti-
     tion functions,” Nuclear Physics B, vol. 646, no. 3, pp. 353–497, 2002.

[13] J. Fuchs, I. Runkel, and C. Schweigert, “Tft construction of rcft correlators: Iii:
     Simple currents,” Nuclear Physics B, vol. 694, no. 3, pp. 277–353, 2004.

[14] J. Fuchs, I. Runkel, and C. Schweigert, “Tft construction of rcft correlators iv::
     Structure constants and correlation functions,” Nuclear physics B, vol. 715, no. 3,
     pp. 539–638, 2005.


                                                  78
[15] R. Longo, “Index of subfactors and statistics of quantum fields. i,” Communications
     in mathematical physics, vol. 126, no. 2, pp. 217–247, 1989.

[16] R. Longo, “Index of subfactors and statistics of quantum fields,” Communications in
     mathematical physics, vol. 130, no. 2, pp. 285–309, 1990.

[17] Z. Wang, Topological quantum computation. No. 112, American Mathematical Soc.,
     2010.

[18] A. Kitaev, “Anyons in an exactly solved model and beyond,” Annals of Physics,
     vol. 321, no. 1, pp. 2–111, 2006.

[19] A. Feiguin, S. Trebst, A. W. Ludwig, M. Troyer, A. Kitaev, Z. Wang, and M. H.
     Freedman, “Interacting anyons in topological quantum liquids: The golden chain,”
     Physical review letters, vol. 98, no. 16, p. 160409, 2007.

[20] S. Trebst, M. Troyer, Z. Wang, and A. W. Ludwig, “A short introduction to fibonacci
     anyon models,” Progress of Theoretical Physics Supplement, vol. 176, pp. 384–407,
     2008.

[21] C. Gils, E. Ardonne, S. Trebst, A. W. Ludwig, M. Troyer, and Z. Wang, “Collective
     states of interacting anyons, edge states, and the nucleation of topological liquids,”
     Physical review letters, vol. 103, no. 7, p. 070401, 2009.

[22] C. Gils, E. Ardonne, S. Trebst, D. A. Huse, A. W. Ludwig, M. Troyer, and Z. Wang,
     “Anyonic quantum spin chains: Spin-1 generalizations and topological stability,”
     Physical Review B, vol. 87, no. 23, p. 235120, 2013.

[23] S. Trebst, E. Ardonne, A. Feiguin, D. A. Huse, A. W. Ludwig, and M. Troyer,
     “Collective states of interacting fibonacci anyons,” Physical review letters, vol. 101,
     no. 5, p. 050401, 2008.

[24] E. Ardonne, J. Gukelberger, A. W. Ludwig, S. Trebst, and M. Troyer, “Microscopic
     models of interacting yang–lee anyons,” New Journal of Physics, vol. 13, no. 4,
     p. 045006, 2011.

[25] R. Vanhove, L. Lootens, M. Van Damme, R. Wolf, T. Osborne, J. Haegeman, and
     F. Verstraete, “A critical lattice model for a haagerup conformal field theory,” arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2110.03532, 2021.

[26] T.-C. Huang, Y.-H. Lin, K. Ohmori, Y. Tachikawa, and M. Tezuka, “Numerical
     evidence for a haagerup conformal field theory,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.03008,
     2021.

[27] M. S. Zini and Z. Wang, “Conformal field theories as scaling limit of anyonic chains,”
     Communications in Mathematical Physics, vol. 363, no. 3, pp. 877–953, 2018.

[28] L. Lootens, J. Fuchs, J. Haegeman, C. Schweigert, and F. Verstraete, “Matrix product
     operator symmetries and intertwiners in string-nets with domain walls,” SciPost
     Physics, vol. 10, no. 3, p. 053, 2021.


                                            79
[29] N. Bultinck, M. Mariën, D. J. Williamson, M. B. Şahinoğlu, J. Haegeman, and
     F. Verstraete, “Anyons and matrix product operator algebras,” Annals of physics,
     vol. 378, pp. 183–233, 2017.

[30] V. Jones, “Index for subfactors,” 1983.

[31] S. Popa, “Classification of subfactors: the reduction to commuting squares,” Inven-
     tiones mathematicae, vol. 101, no. 1, pp. 19–43, 1990.

[32] D. Bisch and V. Jones, “Singly generated planar algebras of small dimension,” Duke
     Mathematical Journal, vol. 101, no. 1, pp. 41–75, 2000.

[33] A. Ocneanu, “Quantized groups, string algebras and galois theory for algebras,”
     Operator algebras and applications, vol. 2, pp. 119–172, 1988.

[34] A. Ocneanu, “Quantum symmetry, differential geometry of finite graphs and classi-
     fication of subfactors, university of tokyo seminary notes 45,” Notes recorded by Y.
     Kawahigashi, 1991.

[35] D. Bisch and V. Jones, “Algebras associated to intermediate subfactors,” Inventiones
     mathematicae, vol. 128, no. 1, pp. 89–157, 1997.

[36] D. Bisch, “Bimodules, higher relative commutants and the fusion algebra associated
     to a subfactor,” The Fields Institute for Research in Mathematical Sciences Com-
     munications Series, vol. 13, pp. 13–63, 1997.

[37] D. E. Evans, Y. Kawahigashi, et al., Quantum symmetries on operator algebras,
     vol. 147. Clarendon Press Oxford, 1998.

[38] V. F. Jones, “Planar algebras, i,” arXiv preprint math/9909027, 1999.

[39] Y. Kawahigashi, “Projector matrix product operators, anyons and higher relative
     commutants of subfactors,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.04562, 2021.

[40] Y. Kawahigashi, “A remark on matrix product operator algebras, anyons and sub-
     factors,” Letters in Mathematical Physics, vol. 110, no. 6, pp. 1113–1122, 2020.

[41] M. Izumi, “The structure of sectors associated with longo–rehren inclusions i. general
     theory,” Communications in Mathematical Physics, vol. 213, no. 1, pp. 127–179,
     2000.

[42] R. Longo and K.-H. Rehren, “Nets of subfactors,” Reviews in Mathematical Physics,
     vol. 7, no. 04, pp. 567–597, 1995.

[43] M. Müger, “From subfactors to categories and topology i: Frobenius algebras in
     and morita equivalence of tensor categories,” Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra,
     vol. 180, no. 1-2, pp. 81–157, 2003.

[44] A. Stottmeister, “Anyon braiding and the renormalization group,” arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2201.11562, 2022.


                                            80
[45] W. Koo and H. Saleur, “Representations of the virasoro algebra from lattice models,”
     Nuclear Physics B, vol. 426, no. 3, pp. 459–504, 1994.

[46] F. Hiai, “Minimizing indices of conditional expectations onto a subfactor,” Publica-
     tions of the Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 673–678,
     1988.

[47] H. Kosaki, “Extension of jones’ theory on index to arbitrary factors,” Journal of
     functional analysis, vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 123–140, 1986.

[48] M. Izumi, “Application of fusion rules to classification of subfactors,” Publications of
     the Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences, vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 953–994, 1991.

[49] S. Doplicher and J. E. Roberts, “A new duality theory for compact groups,” Inven-
     tiones mathematicae, vol. 98, no. 1, pp. 157–218, 1989.

[50] R. Haag, Local quantum physics: Fields, particles, algebras. Springer Science &
     Business Media, 2012.

[51] T. J. Osborne and A. Stottmeister, “Conformal field theory from lattice fermions,”
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.13834, 2021.

[52] T. J. Osborne and A. Stottmeister, “Quantum simulation of conformal field theory,”
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.14214, 2021.

[53] V. Morinelli, G. Morsella, A. Stottmeister, and Y. Tanimoto, “Scaling limits of lattice
     quantum fields by wavelets,” Communications in Mathematical Physics, vol. 387,
     no. 1, pp. 299–360, 2021.

[54] V. F. R. Jones, “Scale invariant transfer matrices and hamiltionians,” Journal of
     Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical, vol. 51, p. 104001, feb 2018.

[55] J. Böckenhauer and D. E. Evans, “Modular invariants, graphs and α-induction for
     nets of subfactors i,” Communications in Mathematical Physics, vol. 197, no. 2,
     pp. 361–386, 1998.

[56] J. Böckenhauer and D. E. Evans, “Modular invariants, graphs and α-induction for
     nets of subfactors. ii,” Communications in Mathematical Physics, vol. 200, no. 1,
     pp. 57–103, 1999.

[57] J. Böckenhauer and D. E. Evans, “Modular invariants, graphs and α-induction for
     nets of subfactors. iii,” Communications in Mathematical Physics, vol. 205, no. 1,
     pp. 183–228, 1999.

[58] J. Böckenhauer, D. E. Evans, and Y. Kawahigashi, “On α-induction, chiral generators
     and modular invariants for subfactors,” Communications in Mathematical Physics,
     vol. 208, no. 2, pp. 429–487, 1999.

[59] M. Buican and A. Gromov, “Anyonic chains, topological defects, and conformal field
     theory,” Communications in Mathematical Physics, vol. 356, no. 3, pp. 1017–1056,
     2017.

                                             81
[60] M. Bischoff, Y. Kawahigashi, R. Longo, and K.-H. Rehren, “Phase boundaries in
     algebraic conformal qft,” Communications in Mathematical Physics, vol. 342, no. 1,
     pp. 1–45, 2016.

[61] A. Bartels, C. Douglas, and A. Henriques, Fusion of defects, vol. 258. American
     Mathematical Society, 2019.

[62] R. Vanhove, M. Bal, D. J. Williamson, N. Bultinck, J. Haegeman, and F. Verstraete,
     “Mapping topological to conformal field theories through strange correlators,” Phys-
     ical review letters, vol. 121, no. 17, p. 177203, 2018.

[63] R. Vanhove, L. Lootens, H.-H. Tu, and F. Verstraete, “Topological aspects of the
     critical three-state potts model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.11177, 2021.

[64] D. Aasen, P. Fendley, and R. S. Mong, “Topological defects on the lattice: dualities
     and degeneracies,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.08598, 2020.

[65] M. Takesaki, Theory of operator algebras I-III, vol. 125. Springer, 2003.

[66] R. Longo and J. E. Roberts, “A theory of dimension,” arXiv preprint funct-
     an/9604008, 1996.

[67] R. Longo, “A duality for hopf algebras and for subfactors. i,” Communications in
     mathematical physics, vol. 159, no. 1, pp. 133–150, 1994.

[68] K.-H. Rehren, “Canonical tensor product subfactors,” Communications in Mathe-
     matical Physics, vol. 211, no. 2, pp. 395–406, 2000.

[69] C. J. Fewster and S. Hollands, “Quantum energy inequalities in two-dimensional
     conformal field theory,” Reviews in Mathematical Physics, vol. 17, no. 05, pp. 577–
     612, 2005.

[70] M. Bischoff, Y. Kawahigashi, and R. Longo, “Characterization of 2d rational local
     conformal nets and its boundary conditions: the maximal case,” arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1410.8848, 2014.

[71] V. Jones and S. Reznikoff, “Hilbert space representations of the annular temperley–
     lieb algebra,” Pacific journal of mathematics, vol. 228, no. 2, pp. 219–249, 2006.

[72] H. Kosaki, “Characterization of crossed product (properly infinite case).,” Pacific
     Journal of Mathematics, vol. 137, no. 1, pp. 159–167, 1989.




                                           82
