                                     The Bubble Algebra:
                                     Structure of a Two-Colour Temperley-Lieb Algebra
                                                   Uwe Grimm† and Paul P Martin‡
arXiv:math-ph/0307017v3 9 Oct 2003




                                                   † Applied Mathematics Department, The Open University, Walton Hall, Milton
                                                   Keynes MK7 6AA, UK
                                                   ‡ Mathematics Department, City University, Northampton Square, London EC1V
                                                   0HB, UK

                                                   Abstract. We define new diagram algebras providing a sequence of multiparameter
                                                   generalisations of the Temperley-Lieb algebra, suitable for the modelling of dilute
                                                   lattice systems of two-dimensional Statistical Mechanics. These algebras give a rigorous
                                                   foundation to the various ‘multi-colour algebras’ of Grimm, Pearce and others. We
                                                   determine the generic representation theory of the simplest of these algebras, and
                                                   locate the nongeneric cases (at roots of unity of the corresponding parameters). We
                                                   show by this example how the method used (Martin’s general procedure for diagram
                                                   algebras) may be applied to a wide variety of such algebras occurring in Statistical
                                                   Mechanics.
                                                       We demonstrate how these algebras may be used to solve the Yang-Baxter
                                                   equations.



                                                   PACS numbers: 02.10.Hh, 05.50.+q, 11.25.Hf


                                     1. Introduction

                                     Some time ago, motivated by the study of dilute lattice models [41, 50], Grimm and
                                     Pearce [18] introduced generalisations of certain diagram algebras (algebras with a
                                     diagrammatic formulation [33]), such as Temperley-Lieb [44] and Murakami-Birman-
                                     Wenzl [39, 4] algebras. These algebras are important in the theory of solvable lattice
                                     models of two-dimensional Statistical Mechanics [2] and are related to link and knot
                                     invariants [46]. The generalisation was conceived on the diagram level by introducing
                                     diagrams with lines in a number of colours. Each algebra was then described by
                                     generators and relations dictated, or at least suggested, by the requirement of solving
                                     the Yang-Baxter equations. However the diagrammatic (which is to say, topological)
                                     underpinning was not precisely formalised.
                                          The classes of solvable lattice models called dilute lattice models [41, 50, 51] whose
                                     discovery motivated this generalisation are closely linked to models of dilute loops on a
                                     lattice [1, 49]. These models attract particular interest because they contain a solvable
                                     ‘companion’ of the two-dimensional Ising model in a magnetic field [50, 16, 17] — one
The Bubble Algebra                                                                        2

of the famous unsolved problems in Statistical Mechanics. The idea here is to consider
two colours, and to regard the second colour merely as a dilution of the first.
     In the two colour case the requirement of solving the Yang-Baxter equations is
fully satisfied by the design of the relations. The Yang-Baxter equations are sufficient
to guarantee solvability in the sense of commuting transfer matrices [2, 46]. Thus
representations of such algebras give rise to solvable dilute and two-colour lattice models.
(More precisely, one has relations for a tower of algebras, and the representation must
be defined for the whole tower.) Various explicit representations and associated models
are considered in [18, 10, 11, 20, 21, 12].
     The representations found included previously known lattice models [10, 11], but
also gave rise to new series of solvable lattice models [20, 21, 12]. However, little
else was discovered about these algebras and their structures. We have generators
and relations, and enough representations to show that these relations do not imply a
trivial algebra, but no knowledge of dimensions or even finiteness, and no analysis of
irreducible representations. To this extent the representations which were found were
a matter of luck, and there was no way to tell if the relations could engender other
important but undiscovered models. This may be contrasted with our quite complete
knowledge of the representation theory of the Temperley-Lieb algebra itself, which is
strikingly rich and beautiful, and important in several areas of mathematics and physics
[8, 27, 28, 33, 25, 29].
     In this paper we define a new algebra — the bubble algebra. We define this
algebra entirely diagrammatically, such that it is amenable to the general method of [33,
§9.5],[36]. We then show that this gives a properly constituted diagrammatic realisation
of the Grimm-Pearce multi-colour Temperley-Lieb algebra (i.e. it solves the Yang-Baxter
equations). We hence use the general method to determine the generic representation
theory of these algebras completely. We set up the machinery to investigate their
exceptional representation theory (analogous to that of ordinary Hecke algebras at q
a root of unity). We show how irreducible representations may be associated to physical
observables in the corresponding lattice models. We conclude with a discussion of the
implications of our results for Bethe ansatz on models derived using this algebra. We
mainly discuss the case of two colours, as the further generalisation to more colours is
straightforward. (The case of one colour is the original Temperley-Lieb algebra.)
     Generalisations of the Temperley-Lieb algebra are two-a-penny [35, 36, 31, 42, 9],
however there are now a number of reasons for looking at the algebras introduced in [18]
again. Firstly, the diagram form of the Temperley-Lieb algebra is a deep and powerful
property (cf. [27, 28, 33]), and our new realisation provides a natural generalisation on
the diagram level. Secondly, they provide solutions of the Yang-Baxter equation as we
have said. They are similar in some ways to the blob algebra, which has recently been
shown [6] to be useful in solving the reflection equation [43]. We also expect them to be
of use in constructing integrable boundary conditions for certain solvable lattice models,
including ‘conformal twisted’ boundary conditions [19, 3, 40, 14, 15], and thus to be of
relevance to boundary conformal field theory. Thirdly, we show that they are part of
The Bubble Algebra                                                                         3

a class of algebras amenable to the methods of [36], so that we may now analyse them
quite efficiently (and hence provide a uniform theory of such algebras). This analysis
suggests (see later) that they may be relevant for Statistical Mechanics on ladders (cf.
recent works [48, 47, 45]), and indeed, just recently, this was shown to be the case
[22]. They also look like they should be relevant for circuit design and even transport
network design (although we know of no example of their use in these areas!) as we
will see. There are also similarities with Murakami-Birman-Wenzl algebras [39, 4] and
Fuss-Catalan algebras [7], both of which have been used to construct integrable systems,
to the extent that the same methods are applicable there. Finally, they have a number
of features of technical interest in representation theory (we largely postpone comment
on these to a separate paper, but see section 6 for a brief discussion).
     We start with some definitions.

2. Diagram algebras

Our new algebra is a diagram algebra — an algebra with a diagrammatic formulation
akin to the Temperley-Lieb algebra [44, 33]. It will be convenient to recall this familiar
example in a suitable formalism, and then generalise to our case.
(2.1)       Fix a rectangular subset of R2 such that there is an edge with a North pointing
normal (e.g. [0, 1] × [0, 1]). Label each edge by the direction (NSEW) of its normal.
Consider the set of partitions of this rectangle by finitely many continuous non-crossing
lines (walls) with no wall touching the E or W edge. We define an equivalence relation
on this set by equivalencing two such partitions if they differ only by a continuous edge
preserving deformation of the rectangle. We call (representatives of) equivalence classes
diagrams.
      We say we can compose two such partitions, a over b, if there lie in their equivalence
classes two diagrams such that when a is juxtaposed with b from above, the southern
endpoints of lines in a coincide with the northern endpoints of lines in b (NB, this
requires only that the number of lines matches up). Each point of coincidence may then
be regarded as an interior point of a continuous line passing though the juxtaposition
a|b. The composite ab is the new partition of the combined region which results from
this.
(2.2)       Consider the subset of diagrams where there are precisely n endpoints on
each northern and each southern edge. For q an invertible indeterminate, consider
the Z[q, q −1 ]-linear extension of this set. Let Tn,Z denote the quotient of this set by the
relation which equivalences any diagram with a closed (interior) loop to δ times the same
diagram without, where δ = q + q −1 . Note that Tn,Z has basis the set of diagrams where
there are precisely n endpoints on each northern and each southern edge, and no interior
loops. Note that the composition of diagrams passes to a well defined composition on
this set, making it a Z[q, q −1 ]-algebra.
      Fix K a field which is a Z[q, q −1 ]-algebra (for example, the complex numbers, with
q acting as some specified nonzero complex number). The Temperley-Lieb algebra Tn (q)
The Bubble Algebra                                                                      4

is the K-algebra K ⊗Z[q,q−1 ] Tn,Z .
(2.3)      A line in a diagram with one endpoint in the Northern (N) edge and one
in the S edge is called a propagating line. The identity element of Tn (q) is the unique
diagram all of whose lines are propagating.
     There are a number of ways of embedding Tn−1 as a subalgebra in Tn . We will
call that embedding which maps a ∈ Tn−1 to the same diagram, but with one extra
propagating line on the right, the natural embedding.
     For brevity we will assume familiarity with the usual presentation of Tn by
generators {U1 , U2 , .., Un−1 } and relations, and the correspondence with the diagram
version (see for example [32]).
      The topological/diagram realisation of the Temperley-Lieb algebra is enormously
useful [33, 9] and deep [27, 28, 29]. We require a similarly clearcut and intuitive
construction, let us call it a model, for the algebra introduced in [18]. Here we will
concentrate mainly on the model for two colours. The generalisation to arbitrarily
many colours will be obvious. A generalisation to the Murakami-Birman-Wenzl version
is also possible.
      Before we introduce the model note that the Temperley-Lieb diagrams described
above may be regarded as partitionings of the set of endpoints into pairs. The non-
crossing rule means that they are a proper subset of the set BnJ of all such pair
partitionings in general. The full set BnJ is a basis for the Brauer algebra Jn [5] (whose
composition rule need not concern us here).
(2.4)       Now consider the set each element of which consists of two independent (but
simultaneous) partitionings of a rectangle as above (one, say, with red lines, one with
blue). Here independence means that walls of different colours may cross, but we will
exclude elements in which such crossings occur on the frame of the rectangle. We define
an equivalence essentially as before, so for example (locally)




but (because of the exclusion) not on the frame:
The Bubble Algebra                                                                                 5

This is as if we have two parallel but independent deformable rectangles (one for each
colour), but they share the frame. Another way to think of this is as lines embedded
not just in a rectangle, but in bubble wrap (bubble wrap is made from two sheets of
polythene welded together along certain lines to trap bubbles). Red lines are allowed
on the welds and the back sheet, blue lines are allowed on the welds and the front sheet:




In this realisation lines on the same sheet (or on the weld) are not allowed to touch, but
otherwise may be deformed isotopically as before. Accordingly, we call the deformation
equivalence ‘bubble isotopy’.
      Again we define composition whenever the number of endpoints (irrespective of
colour) matches up. We do this as follows. We call the match up precise if the colours
match up precisely (i.e. we can identify the touching edges and have a properly formed
two-colour partition). The composite is 0 unless the colours match up precisely. If they
do match up the composite is that two-colour partition.
      Consider the subset of double partitionings in which the total number of endpoints
(red and blue) on the northern edge is n, and similarly on the southern edge. The
                     2
bubble algebra Tn,Z     (so named to emphasise the topological diagram underpinning) is the
        −1        −1
Z[qr , qr , qb , qb ]-linear extension of this set and composition, with internal closed loop
                                         2
replacements (as in Tn (q)). Thus Tn,Z       has a basis, Bn say, of two-colour partitions (up
to bubble isotopy) with no internal loops. The loop replacement scalar δ here depends
on the colour: δr = qr + qr−1 and δb = qb + qb−1 . Fix a field K which is a Z[qr , qr−1 , qb , qb−1]-
algebra as before (e.g. the complex numbers with qr , qb specified complex numbers).
                                                2
Denote the K-algebra K ⊗Z[qr ,qr−1 ,qb,q−1 ] Tn,Z  by Tn2 = Tn2 (qr , qb ).
                                           b
      The obvious generalisations TnN (N = 1, 2, ..) include Tn1 = Tn .
(2.5)         Let #r (d) denote the number of red propagating lines in diagram d (and
The Bubble Algebra                                                                         6

similarly for blue). Extend this to apply to any non-zero scalar multiple of d. It will be
evident that composing with any second diagram d′ such that dd′ 6= 0 we have
               #r (dd′ ) ≤ #r (d)                                                        (1)
and similarly for blue. Write Bn (i, j) for the subset of Bn with #r (d) = i, #b (d) = j,
and define
               Bn (i) = ∪j Bn (i − j, j)

               Bn [i] = ∪j≤i Bn (j)

so Bn (i) and Bn [i] consist of those diagrams in Bn with exactly i and at most i
propagating lines, respectively.
      We say that two lines are strictly non-crossing when they are non-crossing even when
projected into a single plane (so as to recover Grimm and Pearce’s original diagrams).
Write Bn′ (i, j) for the subset of Bn (i, j) with lines all strictly non-crossing, and define
Bn′ (i) similarly.
      For example Bn′ (n) is the set of diagrams with all lines propagating and strictly
non-crossing. It will be evident that |Bn′ (n)| = 2n , and that
                      X
                1=         d
                      ′ (n)
                   d∈Bn

is an orthogonal idempotent decomposition of the identity element of Tn2 .
     If d ∈ Bn−1 , let Ir (d), Ib (d) ∈ Bn denote the same diagram except with one extra
non-crossing propagating red (resp. blue) line to the right of all other lines. Thus Ir and
                                                                            2
Ib are injective maps on bases, which extend to injective maps from Tn−1        to Tn2 . Note
that these maps do not preserve the identity element. There is, however, an inclusion
               I : Tn−1 ֒→ Tn
given by d 7→ Ir (d) + Ib (d) which we will call the ‘natural’ inclusion by analogy with
the Tn case.
(2.6)      The basis Bn may be constructed systematically for each n from that for
n − 1 using some simple combinatorial devices which we will describe shortly.
     Examples: The basis B1 of T12 consists of the following diagrams
The Bubble Algebra                                                                       7

    The basis B2 of T22 consists of the following diagrams




In particular B2 (0, 0) consists of the diagrams in the middle row; B2 (2, 0) consists only
of the leftmost diagram in the top row; and B2 (0, 2) the rightmost. The remaining
diagrams are in B2 (1, 1), thus B2 = B2 (0, 0) ∪ B2 (2, 0) ∪ B2 (0, 2) ∪ B2 (1, 1).
     Let us write U1r for the rightmost diagram in the middle row of B2 diagrams above,
and also for the image of this diagram under I (or arbitrary compositions of I). Let w
be a sequence in {r, b} of length n − 2m, then write erw for the following element of Bn :
                                             m                          w




                                                  ...

              erw =


(in this example w = rrbbr).

3. Solutions to the Yang-Baxter Equations

In the sections after this one we will return to discussing the general algebra basis and
irreducible representation theory. First let us briefly look at how the algebra can be
used to build solutions to the Yang-Baxter equations. We will need to start with some
notation and definitions.
The Bubble Algebra                                                                               8

3.1. One colour notations
Consider the ordinary spin chain representation [44, 2] of the one colour Temperley-Lieb
algebra. Choose a basis v1 = | + +i, v2 = | + −i, v3 = | − +i, v4 = | − −i and define
                              0 0 0 0
                                           
                       0 q 1 0
              e=         =  0 1 q −1 0 
                                                                                    (2)

                                   0 0     0       0
We can think of this as a product of a bra and a ket
                                               0
                                                   
                                    q 21            1            1
             e=          =               = q − 21  ( 0 q 2
                                                                     q− 2   0)                (3)

                                                           0
where
                     t                     1       1
                           =           = (0 q2     q− 2        0)                              (4)

3.2. Two colour representation
We now describe a (highly reducible) representation of the two colour algebra. This is
a representation on the tensor product space C4 ∼
                                                         n
                                                           = C4 ⊗ C4 ⊗ . . . ⊗ C4 . We specify the
representation by giving the explicit representation matrices of the ten elements of the
basis B2 of T22 on C16 ∼= C4 ⊗ C4 . The representation matrices are thus 16 × 16 matrices,
with entries that now depend on two parameters qr and qb . The matrices are given in
the basis v1 = |r+ r+ i, v2 = |r+ r− i, v3 = |r+ b+ i, v4 = |r+ b− i, v5 = |r− r+ i, v6 = |r− r− i,
v7 = |r− b+ i, v8 = |r− b− i, v9 = |b+ r+ i, v10 = |b+ r− i, v11 = |b+ b+ i, v12 = |b+ b− i,
v13 = |b− r+ i, v14 = |b− r− i, v15 = |b− b+ i, v16 = |b− b− i of C16 , where r and b refer to the
two colours, and we have an additional variable living on the lines which you may think
of as an arrow pointing up (+) or down (−), as in the usual spin chain representation
of the Temperley-Lieb algebra, compare equation (2).
     The representation matrices for the elements with two propagating straight red or
blue lines are diagonal, with elements
                    
                        = diag(1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0) ,
                    
                        = diag(0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0) ,
                    
                        = diag(0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0) ,
                    
                        = diag(0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1) ,
The Bubble Algebra                                                                     9

those for two crossing lines of different colour are
                                                                              
                         0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
                      0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
                                                                              
                      0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
                                                                              
                      0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
                                                                              
                      0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
                                                                              
                                                                              
                      0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
                                                                              
                      0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
                                                                              
            t     0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
       =          ==                                                          .
                                                                              
                      0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
                                                                              
                      0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
                                                                              
                      0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
                                                                              
                      0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
                                                                              
                      0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
                                                                              
                      0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
                                                                              
                                                                              
                      0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
                         0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Finally, there are four colourings of the usual Temperley-Lieb generators. These can
again be written as products of kets and bras, just as in equation (3) for the one colour
case,
                                 
                      =                 ,
                                 
                      =                 ,
                                 
                      =                 ,
                                 
                      =                 ,
where now
   t                    1
                                        −1                  
       =            =   0 qr2       0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ,
                                0 0 qr 2
   t                                        1
                                                       −1   
       =            =   0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 qb2 0 0 qb 2 0 .

3.3. Yang-Baxter construction
Let us elaborate on this by means of an explicit example. From certain representations of
the two-colour bubble algebra, we can derive integrable vertex models. In the simplest
scenario, these vertex models correspond to Ř-matrix solutions of the Yang-Baxter
equation
                                                                               
  Ř(u) ⊗ id id ⊗ Ř(u + v) Ř(v) ⊗ id = id ⊗ Ř(v) Ř(u + v) ⊗ id id ⊗ Ř(u) (5)
which is an equation on a triple tensor product space V ⊗V ⊗V , with Ř acting on V ⊗V .
A particular vertex model on the square lattice is specified by the matrix elements of
Ř(u), which correspond to the Boltzmann weights of the respective local configurations
The Bubble Algebra                                                                     10

(the variable u is the spectral parameter). The transfer matrices Tn (u) are built from
elementary matrices Ř(u), so as to act on the n-fold tensor product V ⊗ V ⊗ . . . ⊗ V .
They commute for different values of u. The free energy of the vertex model is then
obtained from the largest eigenvalue of the transfer matrix, and we are particularly
interested in its behaviour as n tends to infinity.
     The Ř-matrix
                       sin(λ − u)    sin(u)       sin(λ − u)   sin(u)       
               Ř(u) =            I+        e=                   +               , (6)
                         sin(λ)      sin(λ)         sin(λ)         sin(λ)
expressed in terms of generators of the (one-colour) Temperley-Lieb algebra with
q + q −1 = 2 cos λ, is a well-known example of a solution of the Yang-Baxter equation
[46]. In fact it follows from the relations in the Temperley-Lieb algebra that this
combination satisfies the Yang-Baxter equation. Hence this ‘Baxterisation’ shows that
any representation of the Temperley-Lieb algebra with a large n limit yields a solvable
lattice model of Statistical Mechanics. For the representation at hand, this model is the
                                                                                       (1)
well-known six-vertex model, and the Ř-matrix is related to the affine Lie algebra A1
[24].
      Let us now move on to the two-colour case. The Ř-matrix [18, 21]
         sin(λ − u) sin(3λ − u) h           i sin(3λ − u) h             i
Ř(u) =                                 +         +                      +
              sin(λ) sin(3λ)                           sin(3λ)
            sin(u) sin(2λ − u) h          i     sin(u) h           i
          −                           +          +                 +
               sin(λ) sin(3λ)                      sin(3λ)
            sin(u) sin(3λ − u) h          i
          +                           +                                               (7)
               sin(λ) sin(3λ)
with q + q −1 = −2 cos(λ), satisfies the Yang-Baxter equation (5) as a consequence of
the relations of the bubble algebra. Thus any representation of the two-colour bubble
algebra on a tensor product space V ⊗ V ⊗ . . . ⊗ V with qr = qb =: q gives rise to an
integrable vertex model with an Ř matrix given by equation (7) with Boltzmann weights
that are trigonometric functions of the spectral parameter u.
     For the representation at hand, the Ř matrix turns out to be related to the affine
              (1)
Lie algebra C2 [24]. It differs from the vertex model of [24] by a spectral-parameter-
dependent gauge transformation [18].

4. Combinatorics and representation theory

4.1. The algebra basis Bn
Note that Bn is somewhat like the Brauer diagram basis BnJ of the Brauer algebra Jn
[5], which in turn contains the diagram basis of Tn . From each ‘seed’ element of the
Brauer basis we can get some number (0 or more) of diagrams of Bn by colouring the
lines in the following way. First put a total order on the n lines (any one will do —
for definiteness we will number the line coming out of the top left endpoint 1, then
number other lines 2,3,.. as they first appear reading clockwise round the frame). Each
The Bubble Algebra                                                                         11

line, considered in this order, may be coloured red or blue, unless it crosses one or more
already coloured lines, in which case it must be coloured in a colour distinct from those
of all the crossing lines. Of course, if there are three or more lines in the diagram this
may not be possible (i.e. when a line crosses both of a pair of crossed lines), in which
case there are no coloured Brauer diagrams of this type in Bn .
      Apart from the seeds with no possible colourings, each seed produces 2c elements
of Bn , where c is the number of lines in the seed which are either without any crossings,
or are the first line in their crossed cluster (i.e. the line whose colour is chosen freely).
(4.1)        As with Tn [33] there is a bra-ket construction. Imagine cutting the bubble
in half (i.e. cutting through the front and back sheets, leaving a top and bottom piece
each with Y cross-section). It will be evident that it is possible to do this such that
only propagating lines are cut, and these once each. Note that given two pieces in
this way, because of the non-crossing within a layer rule, there is a unique way of
recombining them, i.e. recovering the original diagram. Indeed any bra- (top piece) and
-ket (bottom piece) such that the number of cut lines matches up (on each sheet of the
bubble separately) may be combined in a unique way. For example




                    |i
That is, writing Bn (i, j) for the set of bra pieces obtained by cutting elements of Bn (i, j)
                 h|                                                           |i
(and similarly Bn (i, j) for the set of ket pieces), then any element a of Bn (i, j) may be
                                        h|
combined with any element b of Bn (i, j) in a unique way to make a diagram ab in
Bn (i, j):
               Bn (i, j) ∼
                         = Bn|i (i, j) × Bnh| (i, j).                                     (8)
(4.2)     Following [33, §13.2], we define certain injective homomorphisms of bra sets
for any appropriate n, i, j:
                         |i
               Ar : Bn−1 (i, j) ֒→ Bn|i (i + 1, j)
takes a diagram d to a diagram differing from d only in having an additional red
propagating line at the right hand end;
                         |i
               Ab : Bn−1 (i, j) ֒→ Bn|i (i, j + 1)
similarly, but adding a blue line; for i > 0
                         |i
               Br : Bn−1 (i, j) ֒→ Bn|i (i − 1, j)
The Bubble Algebra                                                                                12

takes a diagram d to a diagram differing from d only in having the Southern endpoint
of the last (rightmost) red propagating line in d turn back to form a new rightmost
Northern vertex; and Bb similarly for the last blue line.
     It will be evident that
Bn|i (i, j) = Ar Bn|i (i − 1, j) ∪ Ab Bn|i (i, j − 1) ∪ Br Bn|i (i + 1, j) ∪ Bb Bn|i (i, j + 1)   (9)
(any undefined set here to be interpreted as the empty set).
(4.3)       It will be convenient to be able to depict the sum of two diagrams in Bn
differing only in the colour of one line by drawing any one of these diagrams with the
relevant line replaced by a thick line (called a white line). We will generalise this so
that a diagram with two white lines is a sum of four diagrams from Bn , and so on. Let
us write Ui for that diagram which has the same shape as the diagram Ui ∈ Tn , but has
all white lines. Note that this is an (unnormalised) idempotent: Ui Ui = (δr + δb )Ui .
     Write el for an all white diagram of the same shape as erw , where l is the length of
the sequence w. Thus en−2m = U1 U3 ..U2m−1 .
     Let ñ denote the element of {0, 1} congruent to n modulo 2.

4.2. Standard modules
Next we construct a basic set of representations of Tn2 .
(4.4)         It will be evident from equation (1) that there is a filtration of Tn2 by ideals
with sections spanned by diagrams having fixed numbers of propagating lines — and
hence having the subsets Bn (i) ⊂ Bn as bases.
      Note in particular from equation (1) that Tn2 U1 Tn2 has basis Bn [n−2] = ∪i≤n−2 Bn (i);
Tn2 U1 U3 Tn2 has basis Bn [n − 4]; and so on. (If n is big enough then Tn2 U1 Tn2 = Tn2 U1 U2 Tn2 ,
Tn2 U1 U3 Tn2 = Tn2 U1 U3 U2 U4 Tn2 , and so on, so these ideals may be considered idempotently
generated over any field K.) The filtration by propagating lines may thus be written
                 Tn2 ⊃ Tn2 U1 Tn2 ⊃ Tn2 U1 U3 Tn2 ⊃ .. ⊃ Tn2 U1 U3 ..U2m−1 Tn2 ⊃ ..
Let us write Tn2 [i] for the ideal spanned by diagrams with ≤ i propagating lines.
     The total number i + j of propagating lines is one of n, n − 2, n − 4, .., 1/0.
This number may be partitioned in any way between red and blue lines, with the
corresponding ideal breaking up as a direct sum accordingly. The filtration thus refines
to one with sections spanned by the sets Bn (i, j) of diagrams with fixed propagating
index (#r (d), #b (d)).
     Each such section breaks up as a sum of isomorphic left modules each with basis
                                    |i
of the form {|aihb| | |ai ∈ Bn (i, j)} where |ai varies over all possibilities and b is
fixed. (There is obviously a parallel construction for right modules.) We denote (any
representative of) the equivalence class of these summands ∆n (i, j). These left modules
are called standard modules.
The Bubble Algebra                                                                         13

    For example, ∆2 (1, 1) has basis




while ∆2 (2, 0) has basis




Note that, because of the sectioning, the action of B2 (0, 0) elements on this object
regarded as a basis element of ∆2 (2, 0) is to give zero (that is, any object with fewer
propagating lines would lie in the next layer of the filtration, and is thus congruent to
zero in this section).
(4.5)       Since the bottom (ket) halves of diagrams regarded as basis elements of
standard modules play no role, we have another basis for each standard module ∆n (i, j),
                       |i
consisting of the set Bn (i, j) of bra diagrams, with the action defined in an obvious way.
     Note the following.
(4.6)      The construction of standard modules is independent of the choice of field.
     Each standard module ∆n (i, j) comes with an inner product via its basis of bra
diagrams (and dual basis of ket diagrams):
                d      d′        = kdd′    d′′
                                                                                         (10)
                |dihd| |d′ihd′ | = hd||d′i |dihd′|
In particular, if i + j = n, it is easily verified that the corresponding Gram matrix,
Gn (i, j), is the unit matrix. Thus ∆n (i, n − i) is irreducible for any qr , qb .
     Note on the other hand that G2 (0, 0) = diag(δr , δb ), so that ∆2 (0, 0) is reducible if
either δr or δb vanishes.
     More generally, it will be evident that |Gn (i, j)| is a non-zero polynomial in δr , δb .
Thus
Theorem 1 The standard modules ∆n (i, j) are generically simple.
(Recall that generically means: in a Zariski open subset of the (δr , δb ) parameter space.)
    On the other hand, inspection of the diagram for erw shows the following:
Proposition 1 Let δr be invertible in K and let erw ∈ Tn2 have sequence w = rr..rbb..b =
r i bj . Then
              ∆n (i, j) ∼
                        = T 2 er
                            n w           mod. T 2 [i + j − 2]
                                                      n
The Bubble Algebra                                                                        14

Proposition 2 Over any field K with δr invertible ∆n (i, j) has simple head.
(Recall that the head of a module is the quotient by the intersection of all maximal
proper submodules.)
Proof: The generating element provided by the previous proposition is an unnormalised
(but normalisable) idempotent. It is not primitive in Tn2 , but it is primitive in a suitable
quotient. This means that the induced module is indecomposable projective in some
quotient, so it has a simple head. Done.
     Next we consider the completeness of this set of representations.
(4.7)      Irrespective of the choice of field, the restriction of standard module ∆n (i, j)
     2
to Tn−1 works as follows. If the line coming out of the last (rightmost) northern endpoint
is propagating and red (resp. blue), then d behaves, on restriction, like an element of the
corresponding basis of ∆n−1 (i − 1, j) (resp. ∆n−1 (i, j − 1)). That is, these modules are
submodules of Resnn−1 ∆n (i, j). If the line coming out of the last (rightmost) northern
endpoint is red (resp. blue) and not propagating, then, quotienting by the submodules
just noted, d behaves, on restriction, like an element of the corresponding basis of
∆n−1 (i + 1, j) (resp. ∆n−1 (i, j + 1)). For example in ∆4 (2, 0), restricting to n = 3
as indicated by the brace we have:




    This information is neatly summarised (including positivity constraints) as follows.
Define a bipartite infinite graph G with vertex set N0 × N0 by
                                                        0,0


                                                  1,0         0,1


                                           2,0          1,1         0,2


                                     3,0          2,1         1,2         0,3

                                            3,1         2,2         1,3         0,4
                              4,0

                        5,0         4,1           3,2




Define Gn to be the full subgraph with vertices (i, j) such that i + j ≤ n.
Proposition 3 The restriction from Tn2 to Tn−1
                                           2
                                               of ∆n (µ) may be given by
            Resn ∆n (µ) ∼
                  n−1    =           +
                               λ ∆n−1 (λ)

where the sum is over the set of nearest neighbours of µ = (i, j) on the graph Gn .
The Bubble Algebra                                                                         15

     It follows that the dimension of the module ∆n (i, j) is the number of walks from
(0, 0) to (i, j) of length n. It follows from this and equation (8) that the rank of the
algebra (the degree of Bn ) is the sum of the squares of these dimensions; and that
Theorem 2 If the algebra is semisimple in some specialisation of the parameters (as
generically, for example — see Theorem 1), then the standard modules are a complete
set of irreducible modules in that specialisation.
(4.8)        A finite dimensional algebra (call it A) has, of course, finitely many classes of
irreducible representations. Let S(A) be the set of these. Now suppose B is a subalgebra
of A, with irreducibles S(B). We can restrict R ∈ S(A) to be a representation of B
(every element of B has a representation matrix in R since B ⊂ A). As a representation
of B this R will not in general be irreducible — in general it will be made up of a sum of
one or more B irreducibles (we say, one or more factors). A Bratteli diagram of the pair
(A, B) is a graph with a vertex for each element of S(A) and a vertex for each element
of S(B) (the union of these vertices is usually but not always taken disjoint). If there is
an edge between a and b say, then it means the restriction of a ∈ S(A) contains b as a
factor. Thus in particular the fact that “the sum of the dimensions of all the factors of
a is the dimension of a itself” becomes “the dimension at a is the sum of the dimensions
of the nearest neighbours of a on the graph (possibly with multiplicities)”.
      A Bratteli diagram of a tower of algebras A ⊃ B ⊃ C... extends this in the obvious
way. If the last algebra in this sequence is a one-dimensional algebra (with one 1d irrep,
call it o) then the number of walks on the graph from o to point a will be the dimension
of the irreducible a (so the set of these walks will be a basis for a). Again for the tower,
S(A) and S(C) may (for ease of drawing, say) be allocated some vertices in common
(‘foreshortened’ diagram). This does not spoil the counting if we are careful (each vertex
corresponds to irreducibles in more than one algebra, but, on fixing a given algebra, that
vertex becomes unambiguous).
(4.9)        In our algebra we see that the standard modules play a special role, somewhat
akin to that of simple modules, although over an arbitrary field they are not themselves
necessarily simple.
      The Bratteli basis diagram of such an algebra is a certain embellished graph, each
vertex of which corresponds to a standard module label (in this case the label consists
of n and a propagating index λ); and each edge of which corresponds to a factor in
the restriction of that module to n − 1 (as above). Each vertex is embellished with a
depiction of a basis for the corresponding standard module.
      A foreshortened Bratteli basis diagram is a Bratteli basis diagram viewed from such
a direction as to cause certain vertices to coincide. In our case it is those vertices for
different n which have the same propagating index (thus a whole tower of embellishments
will have to be drawn at the same point, but there are good reasons for this — see later).
Such a diagram, where possible to draw, contains essentially complete information on
the generic representation theory of the algebra. The (foreshortened) Bratteli basis
The Bubble Algebra                                                                     16

diagram for T−2 begins




                                                                                     (11)
It may be helpful to emphasise that here the basis element




could also be written




— in the bra form these are equivalent, since the red and blue lines are not on the same
bubble layer.
     If an algebra is semisimple (as ours is generically) then its total dimension is the
sum of the squares of the dimensions of the irreducibles. Here we see, for any K, that the
total dimension is the sum of the squares of the dimensions of the standards. Thus the
entire combinatoric is encoded in the pictures. Every possible diagram is built bra-ket
from the kets in the foreshortened Bratteli diagram (and their descendents).
(4.10)       In the ordinary Temperley-Lieb case it is the non-semisimple exceptions
(q root of unity) which are of most interest. We conclude by setting up machinery to
investigate this case (again paralleling Martin’s usual approach [34, 37] to Temperley-
Lieb and its generalisations).
The Bubble Algebra                                                                        17

5. Categories, roots of unity, conformal series etc.

We may use a little category theory to very efficiently rederive the generic representation
theory of Tn2 given above, in such a way that it can readily be extended to the exceptional
cases.
     Recall Ui from section 4 and let U = Un−1 . Note that
               UTn2 U ∼  2
                      = Tn−2 .                                                          (12)
A diagrammatic version of this follows from the representation of U by




(all lines ‘white’) so that




                                2
    Note that U commutes with Tn−2  ⊂ Tn2 so that Tn2 U is a left Tn2 right Tn−2
                                                                             2
                                                                                 -bimodule.
         2         2
Let F : Tn -mod → Tn−2 -mod be the functor
               F : M → UM
         2
and G : Tn−2 -mod → Tn2 -mod
               G : N → Tn2 U ⊗Tn−2
                               2   N.
It follows from (12) that F G = 1T 2 -mod. Thus (so long as U may be normalised as
                                    n−2
                                                                  2
an idempotent) we have a full embedding of the category Tn−2        -mod in Tn2 -mod. The
simple modules L in Tn2 -mod not hit in this embedding are those for which UL = 0.
That is, they are also the simple modules of the quotient algebra Tn2 /Tn2 UTn2 .
                                                                            2
     To reiterate, equation (12) gives what is called a full embedding of Tn−2  in Tn2 . This
                                                2
means that there is a natural injection of S(Tn−2   ) into S(Tn2 ) — another reason for the
foreshortening of the Bratteli diagram. It also means that most of the representation
theory of Tn2 follows from that of Tn−2
                                      2
                                         via a little elementary category theory — and
hence inductively from the trivial cases T02 and T12 .
     Note that Tn2 UTn2 includes every diagram except those with exactly n propagating
lines. Thus Tn2 /Tn2 UTn2 is spanned by the set Bn (n) of diagrams with exactly n
propagating lines. Let Γn denote an index set for the simple modules of Tn2 , and Λn an
The Bubble Algebra                                                                      18

index set for the quotient algebra Tn2 /Tn2 UTn2 . So long as U may be renormalised as an
idempotent it follows that
              Γn = Γn−2 ∪ Λn                                                          (13)
where the union is disjoint. The full embedding allows us to inject Γn−2 ֒→ Γn in
precisely the way implied by the foreshortening of our foreshortened Bratteli diagram.
     By equation (13), we know Γn if we know Λm for all m. We now determine this set.

5.1. The subalgebra generated by Bn (n)
Note that KBn (n) is a subalgebra of Tn2 . Let Tn′ denote this subalgebra, then
              Tn′ ֒→ Tn2 −−
                          ≫ Tn2 /Tn2 UTn2
is a sequence of algebra morphisms. The composite morphism takes an element of
Bn (n) to the same object regarded as a basis element of Tn2 /Tn2 UTn2 , hence it is an
isomorphism. Provided our ground field K has characteristic different from two (we are
mainly interested in C, with characteristic zero, of course) this algebra may be identified
with a certain quotient of the wreath product group algebra KC2 ≀ Sn , where C2 denotes
the cyclic group of order two and Sn the symmetric group (permutation group of n
elements) of order n!, as follows.
     Elements of C2 ≀ Sn may be represented in the form of permutation diagrams where
each line carries zero or one beads:




(i.e. there are 2n n! such diagrams). The rule of composition is then as for ordinary
permutations except that the number of beads on a single line is reduced modulo 2.
      Such a diagram d in which some line is replaced by a (beadless) red (resp. blue)
line is to be understood as the linear combination
                     d0 ± d1
               d′ =                                                                (14)
                        2
where d0 , d1 denote the diagram with that line having zero/one beads respectively.
Replacing all lines in this way, in all possible ways, we have another basis of KC2 ≀ Sn
consisting of all possible two-colourings of permutations. The composition rule here (in
consequence of (14)) is to compose permutations by juxtaposition as usual, except that
if two different coloured lines are juxtaposed the composite is zero.
The Bubble Algebra                                                                         19

     Consider the subset of this basis consisting of elements in which two lines may cross
only if their colour is distinct. This is a basis for a subalgebra (to see this again consider
the different coloured lines as living in two different layers — within a layer there are no
crossings, and this is not affected by composition). Indeed it will be evident that this
subalgebra may be identified with Tn′ .
     Now define two linear combinations in KC2 ≀ S2 , each of shape



                           −




but one with all lines coloured red, one with all lines coloured blue. Note that these
are (unnormalised) idempotents. Define algebra Hn2 to be the quotient of KC2 ≀ Sn (any
n > 1) by both these objects.
      It is well known that the irreducible representations of KC2 ≀ Sn over K = C are
indexed by pairs of integer partitions of combined degree n, and that the idempotents
above are the primitive and central idempotents of KC2 ≀ S2 corresponding to the one-
dimensional irreducible representations indexed by ((12 ), ) and (, (12 )). It follows (after
a little work, see [38]) that the index set for irreducibles of the quotient Hn2 is the subset
of the set of pairs of integer partitions in which no partition has a second row. It follows
similarly that the Bratteli diagram for the tower of these algebras as n varies is the
Pascal triangle, i.e. the simples for given n lie in the nth layer of the Pascal triangle.
      Note that Bn (n) may be regarded as a basis for Hn2 , since in Hn2 any two lines of
the same colour which are crossed may be replaced by the same two lines uncrossed
(i.e. a local implementation of the quotient by the diagram above in that colour). Now
consider the sequence of algebra morphisms
               Tn′ ֒→ KC2 ≀ Sn −−
                                ≫ Hn2
The image of a basis element in Bn (n) under the composite map is the same element
regarded as a basis element of Hn2 . Thus the composite is an isomorphism.
     We have established a sequence of isomorphisms which allows us to identify the
index set for simple modules of Hn2 with Λn . This reproduces the layer of the Pascal
triangle in our original foreshortened Bratteli diagram and, taken layer by layer, using
equation (13) reproduces the whole foreshortened Bratteli diagram.

5.2. On the exceptional structure of Tn2
The rb-sequence of a diagram is the sequence of colours of strings, read off clockwise
from the top left hand corner of the frame. The standard basis Bn (µ) may be partitioned
into subsets of elements with the same rb-sequence, called rb-parts. Since colours are
orthogonal, the inner product is zero on any pair from Bn (µ) unless they lie in the same
The Bubble Algebra                                                                      20

rb-part. Thus the determinant of the Gram matrix is a product of corresponding block
determinants.
     It will be evident that the block determinant depends only on the number of r’s
and b’s, not their order in sequence. It is thus straightforward to determine the roots of
the Gram determinants (which, we recall, are polynomials in δr , δb ), as follows.
     For Bn (i, j) with i + j = n we have |Gn (i, j)| = 1. (Recall that a module is simple
unless its Gram matrix is singular, thus all these modules are simple.) For Bn (i, j) with
i + j = n − 2 all the lines but one are propagating, so all lines of one colour (red or
blue) are propagating. For example, the rrrrbb part of B6 (2, 2) has Gram block




                     δr              1                0




                     1               δr               1




                     0               1                δr




We see that the colour with all lines propagating plays no role, and that the Gram block
coincides, in this example, with the (3, 1) Gram matrix of ordinary T4 (δr ). Thus the
set of roots of any such Gram determinant must be taken from the roots of the Gram
determinants of Tn (δr ) and Tn (δb ). These are well known [33] to lie in the set of roots
of unity (when expressed in terms of qr , qb ) for each colour. That is,
Proposition 4 If neither qr nor qb is a root of 1 then every module ∆n (i, j) with
i + j = n − 2 is simple.

Proposition 5 If either qr or qb is a root of 1 then there is an n such that Tn2 is not
semisimple.

     Now suppose that for some choice of K some standard module, ∆n (µ) say, is not
simple (as already noted, this has to happen for the algebra to fail to be semisimple).
Then in particular this module has some simple module, L(λ) say, in its socle. Take n
to be at its lowest value such that this occurs.
     It is easy to see that both the localisation functor F and the globalisation functor
G take a standard module to a standard module with the same label (or 0 if no such
module exists, in case of F ). It is also easy to see that every simple module occurs as
the head of some standard module. Thus the nonsimplicity of our standard ∆n (µ) must
The Bubble Algebra                                                                       21

show up as a morphism of standard modules between that having the simple L(λ) as its
head (we might as well call it ∆n (λ)), and ∆n (µ). If neither µ nor λ has i + j = n then
we can localise until one of them does, whereupon the corresponding standard is simple
by our earlier analysis, thus this simple standard must be ∆n (λ), and ∆n (µ) must have
i + j < n, that is to say, µ1 + µ2 < n. But now suppose this µ1 + µ2 < n − 2 (and there
is not a suitable choice of µ with µ1 + µ2 = n − 2). Consider the following Frobenius
reciprocity:
Hom(Indnn−1 ∆n−1 (λ1 , λ2 − 1), ∆n (µ)) ∼
                                        = Hom(∆n−1 (λ1 , λ2 − 1), Resnn−1 ∆n (µ))
It is straightforward to show that ∆n (λ) appears in the head of the induced module
Indnn−1 ∆n−1 (λ1 , λ2 − 1). Thus the left hand hom space is not empty. But then neither is
the right, and we have a nontrivial homomorphism of distinct standard modules at level
n−1 also. This is a contradiction of our construction that n is the lowest value for which
such a homomorphism occurs. Thus we may not suppose that µ1 + µ2 < n − 2, i.e., we
must take µ1 + µ2 = n − 2. In other words, the first occurrence of such a morphism
must be into a standard module with this type of label. But by proposition 4 such a
morphism is only possible if at least one of qr , qb is a root of unity. We have established
Proposition 6 If neither qr nor qb is a root of 1, then every module ∆n (i, j) is simple,
and Tn2 is semisimple.
     The determination of the complete structure of Tn2 when the parameters are roots
of unity remains for now an open problem. It should be amenable to the methods we
have developed, but it seems possible that considerably more donkey work remains.
Given the connection between the ordinary case and conformal representation theory
(cf. [30, 23, 37]) the answer should raise some interesting issues.

6. Conclusions and discussion

We have constructed the generic irreducible modules of Tn2 . Every other module (such
as occurs in transfer matrices) can be built as a sum of these.§ Thus the spectrum of any
transfer matrix will be (up to multiplicities) the union of the spectra computed using
these smallest possible modules. This analysis thus provides the most efficient tools for
explicit computation (modulo any overarching constraints imposed in practice by, for
example, implementation of the Bethe ansatz), cf. [2, §12.4]. Note that it also tells us
a convenient labelling scheme for types of correlation functions. The pair label (i, j)
here replaces the charge sector label relevant for Bethe ansatz in ordinary spin-chains
[2, §8.4]. That is, we have two naive pseudoparticle types.
     In case the second colour is merely to be regarded as a dilution (i.e. it just acts as
a placeholder), direct contributions to correlations involving this colour would be trivial
or ignored. In more general settings we have the possibility of correlations in which
distinct operators cross over in the plane (a feature which cannot occur in models built
§ Or in non-semisimple cases as a not necessarily direct sum of their simple heads.
The Bubble Algebra                                                                                22

from the ordinary Temperley-Lieb algebra, such as ordinary Potts models and Ising
models). This ‘thickening’ of the underlying plane lattice provides scope for considering
a number of further generalisations to more exotic 2d models and possibly also to 3d.
We will return to these possibilities in a subsequent paper.
      Certainly Tn2 has a number of relatively obvious generalisations (TnN , N =
3, 4, .., and certain generalisations to more exotic underlying spaces) for which the
corresponding generalised analysis goes through directly. Work is in progress to find
generalisations of Grimm and Pearce’s original idea accordingly.
      It is interesting that the exceptional structure of Tn2 is tied to the same special
parameter choices as are already widely familiar for 2d systems — q a root of unity —
even though our models have multiple parameters. This contrasts sharply with direct
attempts to generalise to 3d, such as the partition algebra, for which a completely
different set of exceptional cases occur [34].
      Finally we note two points of interest in representation theory. The new algebras
have features reminiscent of a recent conjecture (see [38], cf. our section 5.1) for a basis of
generalised blob algebras. These algebras have been used recently to probe the physically
relevant part of the representation theory of affine Hecke algebras [6], so the connection
here is intriguing. Secondly, we observe that there is no known diagram calculus for the
Hecke algebra quotient associated to Uq sl3 (in the sense that the Temperley-Lieb algebra
is a Hecke algebra quotient associated to Uq sl2 ). Indeed there is no calculus for slN for
any N but 2. Such a calculus has long been sought, and would be enormously useful
in a number of areas of representation theory. As a generalisation of the sl2 case, our
calculus provides some intriguing clues for sl3 (although it is not itself an sl3 calculus).

Acknowledgments

UG would like to express his gratitude to the Erwin Schrödinger International Institute
for Mathematical Physics in Vienna for support during two stays in winter 2002/2003,
where part of this work was done.

References

 [1] Batchelor M T, Nienhuis B and Warnaar S O 1989 Bethe-ansatz results for a solvable O(n) model
       on the square lattice Phys. Rev. Lett. 62 2425–2428
 [2] Baxter R J 1982 Exactly Solved Models in Statistical Mechanics (London: Academic Press)
 [3] Behrend R E and Pearce P A 2001 Integrable and conformal boundary conditions for sl(2) A-
       D-E lattice models and unitary minimal conformal field theories, J. Stat. Phys. 102 577–640;
       hep-th/0006094
 [4] Birman J S and Wenzl H 1989 Braids, link polynomials and a new algebra Trans. Am. Math. Soc.
       313 249–273
 [5] Brauer R 1937 On algebras which are connected with the semisimple continuous groups Ann.
       Math. 38 854–872
 [6] Doikou A and Martin P P 2003 Hecke algebraic approach to the reflection equation for spin chains
       J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 36 2203–2225; hep-th/0206076
The Bubble Algebra                                                                                  23

 [7] Di Francesco P 1998 New integrable lattice models from Fuss-Catalan algebras Nucl. Phys. B 532
       609–634
 [8] Donkin S 1998 The q-Schur algebra, LMS Lecture Notes Series vol.253 (Cambridge University
       Press)
 [9] Green R M 1998 Generalized Temperley-Lieb algebras and decorated tangles J. Knot Theory
       Ramifications 7 155–171
                                                                       (2)
[10] Grimm U 1994 Dilute Birman-Wenzl-Murakami Algebra and Dn+1 models, J. Phys. A: Math.
       Gen. 27 5897–5905; hep-th/9402076
[11] Grimm U 1994 Trigonometric R matrices related to ‘dilute’ BWM algebra, Lett. Math. Phys. 32
       183–187; hep-th/9402094
[12] Grimm U 1996 Dilute Algebras and Solvable Lattice Models, in: Statistical Models, Yang-Baxter
       Equation and Related Topics, Proceedings of the Satellite Meeting of STATPHYS-19, Tianjin
       1995, edited by M L Ge and F Y Wu, (Singapore: World Scientific) pp. 110–117; q-alg/9511020
[13] Grimm U 1997 Representations of two-colour BWM Algebras and solvable lattice models, in:
       Proceedings of the Quantum Group Symposium at the XXI International Colloquium on Group
       Theoretical Methods in Physics, edited by H-D Doebner and V K Dobrev (Sofia: Heron Press)
       pp. 114–119; solv-int/9612001
[14] Grimm U 2002 Spectrum of a duality-twisted Ising quantum chain, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 35
       L25–L30; hep-th/0111157
[15] Grimm U 2003 Duality and conformal twisted boundaries in the Ising model. To appear in GROUP
       24: Physical and Mathematical Aspects of Symmetries, edited by J-P Gazeau, R Kerner, J-P
       Antoine, S Métens and J-Y Thibon (Bristol: IOP Publishing); hep-th/0209048
[16] Grimm U and Nienhuis B 1996 Scaling properties of the Ising model in a field, in: Symmetry,
       Statistical Mechanical Models and Applications, Proceedings of the Seventh Nankai Workshop,
       Tianjin 1995, edited by M L Ge and F Y Wu (Singapore: World Scientific), pp. 384–393;
       hep-th/9511174
[17] Grimm U and Nienhuis B 1997 Scaling limit of the Ising model in a field, Phys. Rev. E 55 5011–
       5025; hep-th/9610003
[18] Grimm U and Pearce P A 1993 Multi-colour braid-monoid algebras J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 26
       7435–7459; hep-th/9303161
[19] Grimm U and Schütz G 1993 The spin-1/2 XXZ Heisenberg chain, the quantum algebra Uq [sl(2)],
       and duality transformations for minimal models J. Stat. Phys. 71 921–964; hep-th/0111083
[20] Grimm U and Warnaar S O 1995 Solvable RSOS models based on the dilute BWM algebra Nucl.
       Phys. B 435 482–504; hep-th/9407046
[21] Grimm U and Warnaar S O 1995 Yang-Baxter algebras based on the two-colour BWM algebra J.
       Phys. A: Math. Gen. 28 7197–7207; hep-th/9506119
[22] Gritsev V and Baeriswyl D 2003 Exactly soluble isotropic spin-1/2 ladder models, Preprint
       cond-mat/0306025
[23] Henkel M 1999 Conformal invariance and critical phenomena (Berlin: Springer)
[24] Jimbo M 1986 Quantum R-matrix for the generalized Toda system Commun. Math. Phys. 104
       537–547
[25] Jones V F R 1983 Invent. Math. 71 1; Jones V F R 1985 Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 12 102
[26] Jones V F R 1990 Baxterization Int. J. Mod. Phys. B 4 701–713
[27] Kauffman L and Saleur H 1992 Free fermions and the Alexander-Conway polynomial Commun.
       Math. Phys. 141 293–327
[28] Kauffman L and Saleur H 1992 Fermions and link invariants Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 7 493–532
[29] Khovanov M and Seidel P 2001 Quivers, Floer cohomology and braid group actions Preprint
       math.QA/0006056
[30] Koo W M and H Saleur H 1993 Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 8 5165–5233
[31] Lee H C 1992 On Seifert circles and functors for tangles Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 7 Suppl.1B 581–610
[32] Martin P P 1990 Temperley-Lieb algebras and the long distance properties of statistical mechanical
The Bubble Algebra                                                                                  24

       models J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 23 7–30
[33] Martin P P 1991 Potts Models and Related Problems in Statistical Mechanics (Singapore: World
       Scientific)
[34] Martin P P 1996 The structure of the partition algebras J. Algebra 183 319–358
[35] Martin P P and Saleur H 1994 Algebras in higher-dimensional statistical mechanics — the
       exceptional partition (mean-field) algebras Lett. Math. Phys. 30 179–185
[36] Martin P P and Saleur H 1994 The blob algebra and the periodic Temperley-Lieb algebra Lett.
       Math. Phys. 30 189–206
[37] Martin P P and Woodcock D 2000 On the structure of the blob algebra J. Algebra 225 957–988
[38] Martin P P and Woodcock D 2002 Generalized blob algebras and alcove geometry. To appear in
       LMS Journal of Comp. and Mathematics; math.RT/0205263
[39] Murakami J 1987 The Kauffman polynomial of links and representation theory Osaka J. Math. 24
       745–758
[40] Petkova V B and Zuber J-B 2001 Generalised twisted partition functions Phys. Lett. B 504 157–64
[41] Roche P 1992 On the construction of integrable dilute A-D-E lattice models Phys. Lett. B 285
       49–53
[42] Rui H and Xi C 2001 Cyclotomic Temperley-Lieb algebras Preprint Beijing Normal University
[43] Sklyanin E K 1988 Boundary-conditions for integrable quantum-systems J. Phys. A: Math. Gen.
       21 2375–2389
[44] Temperley H N V and Lieb E H 1971 Relations between the ‘percolation’ and ‘colouring’ problem
       and other graph-theoretical problems associated with regular planar lattices: some exact results
       for the ‘percolation’ problem Proc. R. Soc. A 322 251–280
[45] Tonel A P, Foerster A, Guan X-W and Links J 2003 Integrable impurity spin ladder systems J.
       Phys. A: Math. Gen. 36 359–370; cond-mat/0112115
[46] Wadati M, Deguchi T and Akutsu Y 1989 Exactly solvable models and knot theory Phys. Rep.
       180 247–332
[47] Wang Y 1999 Exact solution of a spin-ladder model Phys. Rev. B 60 9236–9239; cond-mat/9901168
[48] Wang Y and Schlottmann P 2000 Open su(4)-invariant spin ladder with boundary defects Phys.
       Rev. B 62, 3845–3851; cond-mat/0009073
[49] Warnaar S O and Nienhuis B 1993 Solvable lattice models labelled by Dynkin diagrams J. Phys.
       A: Math. Gen. 26 2301–2316 hep-th/9301026
[50] Warnaar S O, Nienhuis B and Seaton K A 1992 New construction of solvable lattice models
       including an Ising model in a field Phys. Rev. Lett. 69 710–712
[51] Zhou Y-K, Pearce P A and Grimm U 1995 Fusion of dilute AL lattice models Physica A 222
       261–306; hep-th/9506108
