                                               Algebraic Quantum Field Theory – an introduction
                                                                  Christopher J Fewster∗1 and Kasia Rejzner†1
                                               1 Department of Mathematics, University of York, Heslington, York YO10 5DD, United Kingdom.




                                                                                   November 19, 2019
arXiv:1904.04051v2 [hep-th] 18 Nov 2019




                                                                                            Abstract
                                                     We give a pedagogical introduction to algebraic quantum ﬁeld theory (AQFT), with the aim
                                                of explaining its key structures and features. Topics covered include: algebraic formulations of
                                                quantum theory and the GNS representation theorem, the appearance of unitarily inequivalent
                                                representations in QFT (exempliﬁed by the van Hove model), the main assumptions of AQFT
                                                and simple models thereof, the spectrum condition, Reeh–Schlieder theorem, split property, the
                                                universal type of local algebras, and the theory of superselection sectors. The abstract discussion
                                                is illustrated by concrete examples. One of our concerns is to explain various ways in which
                                                quantum ﬁeld theory diﬀers from quantum mechanics, not just in terms of technical detail, but
                                                in terms of physical content. The text is supplemented by exercises and appendices that enlarge
                                                on some of the relevant mathematical background. These notes are based on lectures given by
                                                CJF for the International Max Planck Research School at the Albert Einstein Institute, Golm
                                                (October, 2018) and by KR at the Raman Research Institute, Bangalore (January, 2019).


                                          Contents
                                          1 Introduction                                                                                               2

                                          2 Algebraic quantum mechanics                                                                                4
                                            2.1 Postulates of quantum mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                  4
                                            2.2 Algebraic approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 5
                                            2.3 States and representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .               7

                                          3 Case study: the van Hove model                                                                            10

                                          4 Algebraic QFT                                                                                             13
                                            4.1 Basic requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                13
                                            4.2 Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                15
                                            4.3 Quasifree states for the free scalar ﬁeld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             20

                                          5 The spectrum condition and Reeh–Schlieder theorem                                                         24
                                            5.1 The spectrum condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                24
                                            5.2 The Reeh–Schlieder theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                  25
                                            ∗ chris.fewster@york.ac.uk
                                            † kasia.rejzner@york.ac.uk




                                                                                                1
6 Local von Neumann algebras and their universal type                                                27

7 The split property                                                                                 30

8 Superselection sectors                                                                             32
  8.1 Representations of interest in particle physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        34
  8.2 Localized endomorphisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            36
  8.3 Intertwiners and permutation symmetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            38

9 Conclusions                                                                                        41

A Some basic functional analysis                                                                     42

B Construction of an algebra from generators and relations                                           43

C Fock space                                                                                         44


1 Introduction
Algebraic Quantum Field Theory (AQFT) is one of two axiomatic programmes for QFT that emerged
in the 1950s, in response to the problem of making QFT mathematically precise. While Wightman’s
programme [SW00] maintains an emphasis on quantum ﬁelds, AQFT [Haa96, Ara99], developed
initially by Haag, Kastler, Araki and others, takes the more radical step on focussing on local
observables, with the idea that ﬁelds can emerge as natural ways of labelling some of the observables.
Like Wightman theory, its primary focus is on setting out a precise mathematical framework into
which all QFTs worthy of the name should ﬁt. This permits one to separate the general study of
the structure and properties of QFT from the problem of constructing (by whatever means) speciﬁc
QFT models that obey the assumptions. The early development of AQFT is well-described in
the monographs of Haag [Haa96] and Araki [Ara99]. Mathematically, it makes extensive use of
operator algebra methods and indeed has contributed to the theory of von Neumann algebras in
return. Relevant aspects of operator algebra theory, with links to the physical context, can be found in
the monographs of Bratteli and Robinson [BR87, BR97]. AQFT also comprises a lot of machinery
for treating speciﬁc QFT models, which have some advantages relative to other approaches to QFT.
During the last 20 years it has also been adapted to provide rigorous constructions of perturbative
QFT, and also of some low-dimensional models, and its overall viewpoint has been particularly
useful in the theory of quantum ﬁelds in curved spacetimes. A recent edited collection [BDFY15]
summarises these developments, and the two recent monographs [Rej16, Düt19] in particular
describe the application to perturbation theory, while [HS18] concerns entanglement measures in
QFT. An extensive survey covering some of the topics presented here in much greater depth can be
found in [HM07].
    The purpose of these lectures is to present an introduction to AQFT that emphasises some of
its original motivations and de-mystiﬁes some of its terminology (GNS representations, spectrum
condition, Reeh–Schlieder, type III factors, split property, superselection sectors...). We also
emphasise features of QFT that sharply distinguish it from quantum mechanics and which can be
seen particularly clearly in the AQFT framework. Our treatment is necessarily limited and partial;
the reader is referred to the literature mentioned for more detail and topics not covered here.
    The idea of algebraic formulations of quantum theory, which we describe in Section 2, can
be traced back to Heisenberg’s matrix mechanics, in which the algebraic relations between ob-
servables are the primary data. Schrödinger’s wave mechanics, by contrast, starts with spaces of
wavefunctions, on which the observables of the theory act in speciﬁc ways.

                                                   2
    As far as position and momentum go, and for systems of ﬁnitely many degrees of freedom,
the distinction is rather inessential, because the Stone-von Neumann theorem guarantees that any
(suﬃciently regular1) irreducible representation of the commutation relations is unitarily equivalent
to the Schrödinger representation. However, the angular momentum operators provide a classic
example in which inequivalent physical representations appear, and it is standard to study angular
momentum as an algebraic representation problem. However, it was a surprise in the development
of QFT that unitarily inequivalent representations have a role to play here, and indeed turn out to
be ubiquitous. Section 3 is devoted to the van Hove model, one of the ﬁrst examples in which this
was understood. The van Hove model concerns a free scalar ﬁeld with an external source, and
is explicitly solvable. However, one can easily ﬁnd situations in which a naive interaction picture
approach fails to reproduce the correct solution – a failure that can be clearly ascribed to a failure
of unitary equivalence between diﬀerent representations of the canonical commutation relations
(CCRs).
    After these preliminaries, we set out the main assumptions of Algebraic Quantum Field Theory
in Sec. 4. In fact there are many variants of AQFT and we give a liberal set of axioms that can be
strengthened in various ways. We also describe how some standard QFT models can be formulated
in terms of AQFT. Although we focus on free theories, it is important to emphasise that AQFT
is intended as a framework for all quantum ﬁeld theories worthy of the name, and successfully
encompasses some nontrivial interacting models in low dimensions. AQFT distinguishes between
two levels of structure: on the one hand, the algebraic relations among observables and on the other,
their concrete realisation as Hilbert space operators. The link is provided by the GNS representation
theorem (described in Sec. 2.3) once a suitable state has been given. For this reason we spend some
time on states of the free scalar ﬁeld, describing in particular the quasi-free states, which have
representations on suitable Fock spaces. These include the standard vacuum state as well as thermal
states.
    The remaining parts of the notes concern general features of AQFT models, where the power
of the technical framework begins to come through. Among other things, we prove the Reeh–
Schlieder theorem and discuss some of its consequences in Section 5, before turning in Section 6
to the structure of the local von Neumann algebras in suitable representations and the remarkable
result (which we describe, but do not prove) that they are all isomorphic to the unique hyperﬁnite
factor of type III1 . The distinction between one theory and another therefore lies in the way
these algebras are situated, relative to one another, within the algebra of bounded operators on the
Hilbert space of the theory. Finally, Sections 7 and 8 discuss the split property and the theory of
superselection sectors. Like the theory in Section 6, these are deep and technical subjects and our
aim here is to present the main ideas and some outline arguments, referring the dedicated reader to
the literature. On the subject of literature: in this pedagogical introduction we have tended to give
references to monographs rather than original papers, so the reference list is certainly not intended
as a comprehensive survey of the ﬁeld.
    These notes represent a merger and expansion of lectures given by CJF at the AEI in Golm
(October, 2018) and by KR at the Raman Research Institute, Bangalore (January, 2019). We are
grateful to the students and organisers of the lecture series concerned. We are also grateful to the
organisers of the conference Progress and Visions in Quantum Theory in View of Gravity (Leipzig,
October 2018) for the opportunity to contribute to their proceedings.
   1To deal with the technical problems of using unbounded operators.




                                                        3
2 Algebraic quantum mechanics
2.1 Postulates of quantum mechanics
The standard formalism of quantum theory starts with a complex Hilbert space H , whose elements
φ ∈ H are called state vectors. (For convenience some basic deﬁnitions concerning operators on
Hilbert space are collected in Appendix A.) The key postulates of quantum mechanics say that:

    • Pure states of a quantum system are described by rays in H , i.e. [ψ] := {λψ|λ ∈ C}. Mixed
      states are described by density matrices, i.e., positive trace-class operators ρ : H → H ,
      with unit trace.

    • Observables are described by self-adjoint operators A on H . However, the self-adjoint
      operators corresponding to observables may be a proper subset of the self-adjoint operators
      on H ; in particular, this occurs if the system is subject to superselection rules.

    The probabilistic interpretation of quantum mechanics2 is based on the idea that one can associate
to a self-adjoint operator A and a normalised state vector ψ ∈ H a probability measure µψ,A, so
that the probability of the measurement outcome to be within a Borel subset ∆ ⊂ R (for instance,
an interval [a, b]) is given by
                                              ∫
                             Prob(A ∈ ∆; ψ) =    µψ,A(λ) = hψ|P A (∆)ψi ,
                                                       ∆

where P A (∆) is the spectral projection of the operator A associated with ∆, and indeed ∆ → P A (∆)
determines a projection-valued measure. The probability measure µψ,A depends only on the ray [ψ]
and has support contained within the spectrum of A. The moments of this measure are given by
                                         ∫
                                   νn :=     λn µψ,A(λ) = hψ, An ψi ;

conversely, the moments determine the measure uniquely subject to certain growth conditions. For
example, the Hamburger moment theorem [Sim98] guarantees uniqueness provided that there are
constants C and D such that

                                       |νn | ≤ CDn n!          for all n ∈ N0 .                                   (1)

Note, however, that there are many examples in quantum mechanics in which the moments grow
too fast for the unique reconstruction of a probability measure.

Example 1. Consider the quantum particle confined to an interval (−a, a) subject to either Dirichlet
or Neumann boundary conditions at the endpoints, with corresponding Hamiltonian operators HD
or HN respectively. Measurements of the energy in a state ψ ∈ L 2 (−a, a) supported away from
the endpoints are distributed according to probability distributions µψ,HD and µψ,HN , which differ
because the spectra of HD and HN differ. However, they share a common moment sequence because
HD and HN agree on state vectors supported away from the endpoints.

    One can combine eﬀects from two physical states described by state vectors ψ1 and ψ2 by
building their superposition, which, however depends on the choice of representative state vectors,
since the ray corresponding to
                                         ψ = αψ1 + βψ2
   2For simplicity, we restrict to sharp measurements, avoiding the introduction of positive operator valued measures.



                                                           4
typically depends on the choice of α and β. However, sometimes the relative phase between the
state vectors we are superposing cannot be observed. For example, this occurs if ψ1 is a state of
integer angular momentum, while ψ2 is a half-integer angular momentum state. The physical reason
for this is that a 2π-rotation cannot be distinguished from no rotation at all. Of course there are
self-adjoint operators on the Hilbert space that do sense the relative phase: the point is that these
operators are not physical observables.
    Let us give a brief argument for the existence of superselection sectors when the theory possesses
a charge Q, which is supposed to be conserved in any interactions available to measure it. For
simplicity, we assume that Q has discrete spectrum. Let ψ be any eigenstate Qψ = qψ and let P
be any projection corresponding to a zero-one measurement. After an ideal measurement of P in
state ψ returning the value 1, the system is in state Pψ. But as charge is conserved, Pψ must be an
eigenstate of Q with eigenvalue q, so
                                         QPψ = qPψ = PQψ.
We deduce that [Q, P]ψ = 0 and, as the Hilbert space is spanned by eigenstates of Q, it follows
that Q and P commute. Furthermore, Q commutes with every self-adjoint operator representing
a physical observable because any spectral projection of such an operator also corresponds to a
physical observable.
    Mathematically, the allowed physical observables are all block diagonal with respect to a
decomposition of the Hilbert space H as
                                              Ê
                                        H=         Hi ,
                                                    i∈I

where I is some index set and the subspaces Hi are called superselection sectors, which would be
the charge eigenspaces in our example above. The relative phases between state vectors belonging to
diﬀerent sectors cannot be observed. One of the main motivations behind AQFT was to understand
how superselection sectors arise in QFT. We will see that the diﬀerent superselection sectors
correspond to unitarily inequivalent representations of the algebra of observables.

2.2 Algebraic approach
The main feature of the algebraic description of quantum theory is that the focus shifts from states
to observables, and their algebraic relations. It is worth pausing brieﬂy to consider the motivation
for an algebraic description of observables – this is a long story if told in full (see [Emc72]), but
one can explain the essential elements quite brieﬂy.
    The central issue is to provide an operational meaning for the linear combination and product
of observables. Let us suppose that a given observable is measured by a certain instrument;
for measurements conducted in each particular state, the numerical readout on the instrument is
statistically distributed in a certain way, so the observable may be thought of as a mapping from
states to random variables taking values in R. Given two such observables, we can form a third,
by taking a ﬁxed linear combination of the random variables concerned, restricting to real-linear
combinations in the ﬁrst instance. So there is a clear justiﬁcation for treating the set of observables as
a real vector space. Similarly, we may apply a function to an observable by applying it to the random
variables concerned; this may be regarded as repainting the scale on the measuring instruments.
Given any two observables A and B it is now possible to form the observable
                                            1                       
                                   A ◦ B :=     (A + B)2 − A2 − B 2 ,                                  (2)
                                            2
simply by forming linear combinations and squares. This may be regarded as a symmetrised
product of A and B. The remaining problem, which is naturally where the hard work lies, is to ﬁnd

                                                    5
appropriate additional conditions under which the vector space of observables can be identiﬁed with
the self-adjoint elements of a ∗-algebra, so that A ◦ B = AB + B A. We refer the reader to [Emc72];
however, it is clear that observables naturally admit some algebraic structure beyond that of a vector
space.
    The main postulates of quantum theory, in its algebraic form, are now formulated as follows:
   1. A physical system is described by a unital ∗-algebra A, whose self-adjoint elements are
      interpreted as the observables. It is conventional though slightly imprecise to call A the
      algebra of observables. In many situations we impose the stricter condition that A be a unital
      C ∗ -algebra.

   2. States are identiﬁed with positive, normalized linear functionals ω : A → C, i.e. we require
      ω(A∗ A) ≥ 0 for all A ∈ A and ω(1) = 1 as well as ω being linear. The state is mixed if it is
      a convex combination of distinct states (i.e., ω = λω1 + (1 − λ)ω2 with λ ∈ (0, 1), ω1 , ω2 )
      and pure otherwise.
Some deﬁnitions are in order.
Definition 2. A ∗-algebra (also called an involutive complex algebra) A is an algebra over C,
together with a map, ∗ : A → A, called an involution, with the following properties:
   1. for all A, B ∈ A: (A + B)∗ = A∗ + B ∗ , (AB)∗ = B ∗ A∗ ,

   2. for every λ ∈ C and every A ∈ A: (λA)∗ = λA∗ ,

   3. for all A ∈ A: (A∗ )∗ = A.
The ∗-algebra is unital if it has an element 1 which is a unit for the algebraic product (A1 = 1A = A
for all A ∈ A) and is therefore invariant under the involution. Unless explicitly indicated otherwise,
a homomorphism α : A1 → A2 between two ∗-algebras will be understood to be an algebraic
homomorphism that respects the involutions ((αA)∗ = α(A∗ )) and preserves units (α1A1 = 1A2 ).
   The bounded operators B(H ) on a Hilbert space H form a ∗-algebra, with the adjoint as the
involution, but there are other interesting examples.
Exercise 3. (Technical – for those familiar with unbounded operators.) Given a dense subspace D
of a Hilbert space H , let L(D, H ) be the set of all (possibly unbounded) operators A on H defined
on, and leaving invariant, D, (i.e., D(A) = D, AD ⊂ D) and having an adjoint with D ⊂ D(A∗ ).
Then L(D, H ) may be identified with a subspace of the vector space of all linear maps from D
to itself. Verify that L(D, H ) is an algebra with respect to composition of maps and that the map
A 7→ A∗ |D is an involution on L(D, H ), making it a ∗-algebra. Show also that L(H, H ) = B(H ).
(Hint: Use the Hellinger–Toeplitz theorem [RS80, §III.5].)
    The algebra of bounded operators also carries a norm that is compatible with the algebraic
structure in various ways. In general we can make the following deﬁnitions:
Definition 4. A normed algebra A is an algebra equipped with a norm k.k satisfying

                                          k ABk ≤ k Ak kBk .

If A is unital, then it is a normed unital algebra if in addition k1k = 1. If A is complete in
the topology induced by k · k then A is a Banach algebra; if, additionally, A is a ∗-algebra and
k A∗ k = k Ak, then A is a Banach ∗-algebra or B ∗ -algebra.
   A C ∗ -algebra is a particular type of B ∗ -algebra.

                                                    6
Definition 5. A C ∗ -algebra A is a B ∗ -algebra whose norm has the C ∗ -property:

                              k A∗ Ak = k Ak k A∗ k = k Ak 2,   ∀A ∈ A .

    The bounded operators B(H ), with the operator norm, provide an important example of a
C ∗ -algebra. A useful property of unital C ∗ -algebras is that homomorphisms between them are
automatically continuous [BR87, Prop. 2.3.1], with unit norm.
    Turning to our second postulate, the role of the state in the algebraic approach is to assign
expectation values: if A = A∗ , we interpret ω(A) as the expected value of A if measured in the
state ω. At ﬁrst sight this deﬁnition seems far removed from the notion of a state in conventional
formulations of quantum mechanics. Let us see that it is in fact a natural generalisation.
    Suppose for simplicity (and to reduce notation) that A is an algebra of bounded operators acting
on a Hilbert space H , with the unit of A coinciding with the unit operator on H . Then every unit
vector ψ ∈ H induces a vector state on A by the formula

                                          ωψ (A) = hψ| Aψi,

as is seen easily by computing hψ|1ψi = 1 and hψ| A∗ Aψi = k Aψk 2 ≥ 0.

Exercise 6. Show that every density matrix (a positive trace-class operator ρ on H with tr ρ = 1)
induces a state on A according to

                                     ω ρ(A) = tr ρA        A ∈ A.

    However it is important to realise that, in general, not all algebraic states on A need arise
from vectors or density matrices in a given Hilbert space representation. A further important
point is that the deﬁnition of a state is purely mathematical in nature. It is not guaranteed that all
states correspond to physically realisable situations, and indeed a major theme of the subject is to
identify classes of states and representations that, by suitable criteria, may be regarded as physically
acceptable.

Exercise 7. By mimicking the standard arguments from quantum mechanics or linear algebra, show
that every state ω on a ∗-algebra A induces a Cauchy–Schwarz inequality

                                    |ω(A∗ B)| 2 ≤ ω(A∗ A)ω(B ∗ B)                                   (3)

for all A, B ∈ A. Show also that ω(A∗ ) = ω(A), for any A ∈ A. (Hint: consider the linear
combination 1 + αA, for α ∈ C.)

2.3 States and representations
The Hilbert space formulation of quantum mechanics is too useful to be abandoned entirely and
the study of Hilbert space representations forms an important part of AQFT. Let us recall a few
deﬁnitions.

Definition 8. A representation of a unital ∗-algebra A consists of a triple (H, D, π), where H is a
Hilbert space, D a dense subspace of H , and π a map from A to operators on H with the following
properties:

    • each π(A) has domain D(π(A)) = D and range contained in D,

    • π(1) = 1|D ,


                                                   7
    • π respects linearity and products,
               π(A + λB + CD) = π(A) + λπ(B) + π(C)π(D),               A, B, C, D ∈ A, λ ∈ C

    • each π(A) has an adjoint with D ⊂ D(π(A)∗ ), whose restriction to D obeys π(A)∗ |D = π(A∗ ).
In short, π is a homomorphism from A into the ∗-algebra L(D, H ) deﬁned in Exercise 3. Note that
every π(A) is closable, due to the fact that π(A)∗ is densely deﬁned. We will also use the shorthand
notation (H, π) for a representation (H, H, π). In this case, π is a homomorphism π : A → B(H ),
and is necessarily continuous if A is a C ∗ -algebra.

A representation π is called faithful if ker π = {0}. It is called irreducible if there are no subspaces
of H invariant under π(A) that are not either trivial or dense in H .

Definition 9. Two representations (H1, D1, π1 ) and (H2, D2, π2 ) of a ∗-algebra A are called unitarily
equivalent, if there is a unitary map U : H1 → H2 which restricts to an isomorphism between D1
and D2 , and Uπ1 (A) = π2 (A)U holds for all A ∈ A. They are unitarily inequivalent if they are not
unitarily equivalent.
    On a ﬁrst encounter, algebraic states feel unfamiliar because one is so used to the Hilbert space
version. However algebraic states are not too far away from a Hilbert space setting. The connection
is made by the famous GNS (Gel’fand, Naimark, Segal) representation theorem.
Theorem 10. Let ω be a state on a unital ∗-algebra A. Then there is a representation (Hω, Dω, πω )
of A and a unit vector Ωω ∈ Dω such that Dω = πω (A)Ωω and
                               ω(A) = hΩω |πω (A)Ωω i,        ∀ A ∈ A.                              (4)
Furthermore (Hω, Dω, πω, Ωω ) are unique up to unitary equivalence. If A is a C ∗ -algebra, then,
additionally, (i) each πω (A) extends to a bounded operator on Hω ; (ii) ω is pure if and only if
the representation is irreducible; and (iii) if πω is faithful [i.e., πω (A) = 0 only if A = 0] then
kπω (A)k = k AkA .
   Due to the fact that πω (A)Ωω is dense in Hω , we say that Ωω is cyclic for the representation.
The existence of a link between purity and irreducibility is easily understood from the following
example: if ψ, ϕ ∈ H are linearly independent (normalised) vector states on a subalgebra A of
B(H ), then the density matrix state
                            ρ = λ|ψihψ| + (1 − λ)|ϕihϕ|   0<λ<1
                                        √      √
can be realised as the vector state Ψρ = λψ ⊕ 1 − λϕ in the reducible representation
                                             A 7→ A ⊕ A
of A on H ⊕ H .
Proof. The construction of the GNS representation has several steps:
    • Deﬁne a subset Iω ⊂ A by
                                       Iω = {A ∈ A : ω(A∗ A) = 0}.
      Using the Cauchy–Schwarz identity (3), one may prove that Iω is a left ideal: if A ∈ Iω then
                          |ω((B A)∗ (B A))| 2 = |ω(C ∗ A)| 2 ≤ ω(C ∗ C)ω(A∗ A) = 0,
      where C = B ∗ B A, so B A ∈ Iω . A similar argument shows that Iω is a subspace of A and
      that the subspace Iω∗ is a right ideal. (Exercises!)

                                                   8
• Deﬁne a quotient vector space
                                            Dω := A/Iω
  and note that Dω carries an inner product deﬁned by
                               h[A]|[B]i = ω(A∗ B)         A, B ∈ A,
  which is well-deﬁned (i.e., independent of the choice of representatives, and has the properties
  of an inner product) due to the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality and deﬁnition of Iω (Exercises!).
  For example,
         h[A]|[A]i = 0     ⇐⇒       ω(A∗ A) = 0       ⇐⇒          A ∈ Iω   ⇐⇒     [A] = 0.

• Deﬁne the Hilbert space Hω as the completion of Dω with respect to the inner product just
  mentioned; by construction Dω is dense in Hω .
• Deﬁne Ωω = [1] ∈ Dω ⊂ Hω , noting that kΩω k 2 = ω(1) = 1.
• Deﬁne πω as follows: for each A ∈ A, πω (A) is the linear operator Dω → Dω given by
                                  πω (A)[B] := [AB],        B∈A
  which is well-deﬁned due to the left-ideal property yet again. The properties
                                        πω (1) = 1H
                                  πω (A + λB) = πω (A) + λπω (B)
                                      πω (AB) = πω (A)πω (B)
  are easily veriﬁed as identities of operators on Dω , and it is clear that πω (A)Ωω = Dω , so Ωω
  is cyclic as Dω is dense.
  Now observe that
                 hπω (A∗ )[B]|[C]i = h[A∗ B]|[C]i = ω(B ∗ AC) = h[B]|πω (A)[C]i
  for all [B], [C] ∈ Dω . This shows that πω (A) has an adjoint with dense domain including Dω
  and indeed
                                       πω (A∗ ) = πω (A)∗ |Dω .
  Therefore (Hω, Dω, πω ) is a representation of A, and the calculation
                      hΩω |πω (A)Ωω i = h[1]|πω (A)[1]i = h[1]|[A]i = ω(A)
  veriﬁes (4).
• For uniqueness, suppose that another Hilbert space H , dense domain D, distinguished vector
  Ω and representation π are given with the properties stated above. Now deﬁne a linear map
  U : D → Dω by
                                     Uπ(A)Ω = πω (A)Ωω
  noting that this is well-deﬁned because
  π(A)Ω = 0      =⇒                 2
                         0 = kπ(A)ΩkH = ω(A∗ A) = kπω (A)Ωω kH
                                                             2
                                                               ω
                                                                           =⇒      πω (A)Ωω = 0.
  Essentially the same calculation shows that U is an isometry, and as it is clearly invertible, U
  therefore extends to a unitary U : H → Hω so that UD = Dω , UΩ = Ωω and
                                       Uπ(A)U −1 = πω (A)
  acting on any vector in Dω . This is the promised unitary equivalence.

                                              9
    • The special features of C ∗ -algebras are addressed e.g., in [BR87, Prop. 2.3.3 and §2.3.3] .


Exercise 11. Work through all the details in the proof of the GNS representation theorem.


3 Case study: the van Hove model
Our aim in this section is to present a version of van Hove’s model, one of the ﬁrst instances in
which it became clear that unitarily inequivalent representations of the CCRs arise naturally in QFT.
van Hove’s work provided part of the motivation for Haag’s theorem on the nonexistence of the
interaction picture and the subsequent development of AQFT.
    The van Hove model [VH52] describes the interaction of a neutral scalar ﬁeld with an external
source; physically, it is a slightly simpliﬁed version of Yukawa’s model [Yuk35] of the mediation of
internucleon forces by pions, and correctly accounts for the Yukawa interaction. The Lagrangian is
                                        1              1
                                   L = (∇ µ φ)∇ µ φ − m2 φ2 − ρφ
                                        2              2
using the +−−− signature conventions,3 where the source ρ = ρ(x) is a time-independent real-
valued function, or even a distribution: a simple nucleon model might have ρ as a linear combination
of δ-functions.4 The ﬁeld equation is
                                              ( + m2 )φ = −ρ.                                        (5)
Of course, ρ = 0 is the familiar massive real scalar ﬁeld, and in general we know how to solve an
inhomogeneous equation by ﬁnding a particular integral and reducing to a homogeneous equation.
So this model ought to be (and is) exactly solvable. However, let us forget this for a moment and
proceed according to standard lore (and in the ﬁrst instance, a little formally), so as to exhibit the
limitations of naive QFT.
   We shall outline three quantization approaches. The ﬁrst two follow the spirit of wave mechanics.
Namely, having established a Hilbert space representation for the free ﬁeld, we stick with it.

Method 1: Schrödinger picture We work in the standard Fock space of the ρ = 0 model, in
which there are ‘time zero’ ﬁelds ϕ(x), π(x) obeying the equal time commutation relations
                                         [ϕ(x), π(y)] = iδ(x − y)1.                                   (6)
To treat the ‘interacting’ model, one constructs its Hamiltonian Hρ in terms of the canonical variables
ϕ(x), π(x), obtaining the Schrödinger picture evolution e−iHρ t of states. If desired, one can then
pass to the interacting ﬁeld in the Heisenberg picture as
                                         Φ ρ(t, x) = eiHρ t ϕ(x)e−iHρ t .

Method 2: Interaction picture In the interaction picture, the time-dependent ﬁeld is given by
the free ﬁeld Φ0 (t, x) acting on the usual Fock space. The interaction picture state evolution may
be obtained e.g., using a perturbative Dyson expansion.
    Methods 1 and 2 work perfectly well if ρ is a smooth compactly supported function. However,
one encounters problems if ρ has δ-singularities (for UV reasons) or if either m = 0 or ρ ≡ 1 (for
IR reasons). The third method does not suﬀer these problems. It is more algebraic in nature and
does not start from a prejudice about what the Hilbert space of the theory should be. Rather than
treating the van Hove model as a modiﬁcation of the free ﬁeld, we quantize it directly.
   3We also adopt units in which the speed of light and ~ are both set to 1.
   4The Compton wavelength of the pions is approximately seven times that of a proton.

                                                       10
Method 3: Canonical quantization from scratch Start again with classical canonical variables
ϕ ρ and π ρ . Making a Fourier analysis we may (without loss) write them in the form

                                        d3 k 1
                                       ∫
                                                              ∗ ik ·x
                            ϕ ρ(x) =          √ (a(k) + a(−k) )e
                                       (2π)3 2ω
                                           d3 k ω
                                       ∫       r
                          π ρ (x) = −i             (a(k) − a(−k)∗ )eik ·x
                                          (2π)3 2
                                                               p
for complex coeﬃcients a(k); here, the free mode frequency ω = k k k 2 + m2 has been inserted for
later convenience. Now promote the a(k)’s to ‘operators’ and impose the equal time commutation
relations (6), whereupon the a(k) must obey the CCRs

                                   [a(k), a(k ′)∗ ] = (2π)3 δ(k − k ′)1                         (7)

and other commutators vanishing. Note that this is an entirely algebraic procedure and that nothing
has yet been said about any Hilbert space representation. So the term ‘operator’ is a bit misleading
as there is, as yet, nothing to operate on.
    The next step is to introduce the Hamiltonian, which diﬀers from the free Hamiltonian by the
addition of the ρφ terms. Written in normal order, it is

                               d3 k
                          ∫                                                    
                                            ∗        1                       ∗
                    Hρ =              ωa(k) a(k) + √     ρ̂(k)a(k) + ρ̂(k)a(k) ,                 (8)
                              (2π)3                 2ω
where                                            ∫
                                       ρ̂(k) =       d 3 x ρ(x)e−ik ·x                          (9)

is the Fourier transform of ρ.
     We now need to ﬁnd a Hilbert space representation in which (give or take a constant) H ρ is
self-adjoint and the CCRs (7) are valid, and ideally we would like to ﬁnd a vacuum state for H ρ.
This can be accomplished easily, by completing the square in (8) to give

                                          d3 k
                                     ∫
                               Hρ =            ω ã(k)∗ ã(k) + E ρ1,                       (10)
                                         (2π)3
where
                                                          ρ̂(k)
                                           ã(k) = a(k) + √     1,                             (11)
                                                            2ω3
and the constant E ρ is

                                 d 3 k | ρ̂(k)| 2 1
                            ∫                          ∫
                   Eρ = −                        =          d 3 x d 3 y ρ(x)VY (x − y)ρ(y) ,   (12)
                                (2π)3 2ω2          2
in which
                                                    e−mk x k
                                             VY (x) = −
                                                    4πk x k 2
is the Yukawa potential, responsible for the inter-nucleon force in this model. An important point
is that the ã(k) operators clearly obey the same CCRs as the a(k).
     It is now clear how to proceed: we should represent the ã(k)’s and ã(k)∗ ’s as Fock space
annihilation and creation operators, writing Ω̃ for the ‘vacuum vector’ annihilated by the ã(k)’s.
Then Ω̃ is automatically a state of lowest energy for H ρ and, by discarding the constant, we may
arrange that it is a state of zero energy. Of course, the Fock space is just the usual bosonic Fock

                                                       11
space over a 1-particle space L 2 (R3, d 3 k) with Ω̃ as the vacuum vector, and our Hamiltonian is just
the standard Hamiltonian of the free ﬁeld on this space,

                                                  d3 k
                                             ∫
                                      H̃0 =            ω ã(k)∗ ã(k).
                                                 (2π)3
It may seem that this simply reproduces the situation of methods 1 or 2. However, the redeﬁnition (11)
provides the crucial diﬀerence, because the time-zero ﬁelds here are deﬁned in terms of the original
operators a(k). Indeed, a calculation shows that the time-dependent Heisenberg picture ﬁeld is

                          Φ̃ ρ(t, x) = ei H̃0 t ϕ ρ(x)e−i H̃0 t = Φ̃0 (t, x) + φ ρ (x)1,           (13)

where
                                           d 3 k ρ̂(k) ik ·x
                                          ∫
                            φ ρ (x) = −               e      = −(VY ⋆ ρ)(x)                        (14)
                                          (2π)3 ω2
is (formally) a time-independent solution to the ﬁeld equation (5), and

                                      d3 k 1
                                   ∫
                      Φ̃0 (t, x) =        √ (ã(k)e−iωt+ik ·x + ã(k)∗ eiωt−ik ·x )                (15)
                                     (2π)3 2ω

is the standard free real scalar ﬁeld on the Fock space.
     On reﬂection, we see that the canonical quantization procedure amounts precisely to solving the
inhomogeneous equation using a particular integral and a solution to the homogeneous equation,
which we then quantize as a free scalar ﬁeld with Ω̃ as its vacuum vector.
     Provided that φ ρ is at least a weak solution to (5), the ﬁnal quantized model will be well-deﬁned,
in the sense that the ﬁelds give operator-valued distributions weakly solving the ﬁeld equations and
obeying the covariant commutation relations [which are actually the same as for the free ﬁeld, as
can be veriﬁed easily using Peierls method]. In particular, for m > 0, ρ could be any tempered
distribution, so linear combinations of δ-functions, or ρ ≡ 1 are certainly permitted.
     We can now discuss the relation of this model to the approach in Method 1, which started from
the assumption that the time-zero ﬁelds of the van Hove model are exactly those of the free ﬁeld.
Our construction has actually shown that

                            ϕ ρ(x) = ϕ0 (x) + φ ρ(x)1,             π ρ(x) = π0 (x)                 (16)

where ϕ0 and π0 are standard free-ﬁeld time-zero ﬁelds in the vacuum representation. So methods
1 and 3 are equivalent if and only if there is a unitary map U on the free ﬁeld Fock space so that
ϕ ρ(x) = Uϕ0 (x)U −1 , π ρ (x) = Uπ0 (x)U −1 , or equivalently, a(k) = U ã(k)U −1 .
    As the following exercise shows, a necessary (and in fact suﬃcient) condition for the existence
of U is that
                                             d 3 k | ρ̂(k)| 2
                                        ∫
                                                              < ∞,                               (17)
                                            (2π)3 2ω3
which fails for both δ-function singularities and the limit ρ → 1. Whenever the integral in (17)
diverges, method 1, and similarly method 2, therefore fail to reproduce the exact solution to the van
Hove model.

Exercise 12. Supposing that U exists, deduce that ψ = U Ω̃ is annihilated by all a(k). Show that
the n-particle wavefunction component of ψ is

                                   1                                     ρ̂(k)
                              ψn = √ χρ ⊗s ψn−1,                χρ (k) = √     ,
                                    n                                      2ω3

                                                       12
which implies that ψ = 0 unless χρ ∈ L 2 (R3, d 3 k/(2π)3 ), i.e., only if (17) holds. If it does hold,
show further that
                                                   ∞
                                                 Õ    χρ⊗n
                                       ψ=N           √
                                                  n=0 n!
                                                                       2
for some nonzero constant N ∈ C, and hence kψk = |N |e k χρ k /2 .

    The lessons to be drawn from the van Hove model are:

    • Unitarily inequivalent representations of the CCRs appear naturally in QFT, even in simple
      models. In fact, were we to replace ρ 7→ λρ, we would ﬁnd that the corresponding CCR
      representations are unitarily inequivalent for any distinct values of λ, when the integral in (17)
      diverges.

    • The interaction picture does not exist in general. Haag’s theorem, a general result proved
      partly in response to the diﬃculties pointed out by van Hove, shows that the interaction
      picture is of very limited applicability: any QFT on Minkowski space whose time-zero ﬁelds
      coincide with those of a free ﬁeld theory is necessarily a free ﬁeld theory. It is sometimes
      said that Haag’s theorem applies only to translationally invariant theories; this is true of the
      formal statement, but the van Hove model with δ-function potentials shows that the interaction
      picture can fail in nontranslationally invariant situations as well, or even in a ﬁnite volume
      box as in van Hove’s original paper.

    • The success of Method 3 may be attributed to the way it separates the problem of determining
      the algebraic relations, treated ﬁrst, from the problem of ﬁnding a Hilbert space representation,
      treated second.


4 Algebraic QFT
The appearance of unitarily inequivalent representations of the CCRs even in simple QFT models
motivates an approach based in the ﬁrst instance on algebraic relations. In this section we set out
some minimal axioms for AQFT and then give constructions of some simple free QFTs in the AQFT
framework and describe the class of quasifree states for the free scalar ﬁeld.

4.1 Basic requirements
The minimum requirements (more or less) of AQFT on Minkowski spacetime M are:

A1 Local algebras
   There is a unital ∗-algebra A(M) and, to each open causally convex5 bounded region O ⊂ M,
   a subalgebra A(O) containing the unit of A(M), so that the A(O) collectively generate A(M).
   We call A(M) the quasi-local algebra of the theory.

A2 Isotony6
   Whenever O1 ⊂ O2 , the corresponding local algebras are nested,

                                                 A(O1 ) ⊂ A(O2 ).                                            (18)
    5A subset is causally convex if it contains every causal curve whose endpoints belong to it; see Fig. 1 for an
illustration.
    6Doubtless to avoid ‘monotony’.



                                                       13
                                       (a)                          (b)


Figure 1: Sketches of two spacetime regions. (a) A double cone region, which is an example of a
causally convex set; (b) illustrates a non-causally convex set because points in the region may be
joined by a causal curve (e.g., the black line) that leaves it. Sketch of a double cone region.

A3 Einstein causality
   If O1 and O2 are causally disjoint then
                                                 [A(O1 ), A(O2 )] = 0,                                              (19)
    i.e.,
                                  [A1, A2 ] = 0,        for all Ai ∈ A(Oi ), i = 1, 2.                              (20)
A4 Poincaré covariance
   To every transformation ρ in the identity connected component P0 of the Poincaré group, there
   is an automorphism α(ρ) of A(M) such that
                                               α(ρ) : A(O) → A(ρO)                                                  (21)
    such that α(id) = idA(M) and naturally α(σ) ◦ α(ρ) = α(σ ◦ ρ) is required for any σ, ρ ∈ P0 .
A5 Existence of dynamics
   If O1 ⊂ O2 and O1 contains a Cauchy surface of O2 ,7 then
                                                   A(O2 ) = A(O1 ).                                                 (22)
    Sometimes this condition is weakened.
The interpretation of this structure is that the self-adjoint elements of A(O), i.e., A = A∗ ∈ A(O)
are observables that are associated with the region O. Loosely, we may think of them as being
measureable within O; this can be made more precise, see [FV18] and the short account [Few19].
We will use the term local observable algebra to describe A(O). The set of open causally convex
bounded regions is a directed system under inclusion: given any two regions O1 and O2 , there exists
a further region O3 containing them both. For this reason the assignment O 7→ A(O) is often called
a net of local algebras. In this situation, the condition that the A(O) collectively generate A(M)
                                                             Ð
reduces to the issue of whether A(M) is equal to the union On A(On ) [or its closure, if the algebras
                                                                                        Ð
carry suitable topologies; see below], where On is any nested family of regions with n On = M.
    We will add more conditions in due course.

Remarks
    • The prototypical local region is a double cone: namely, the set of all points lying on smooth
      timelike curves between two points p and q (with p and q excluded). By scalings, boosts
      and translations, all double cones in Minkowski space can be obtained from the elementary
      example
                                    O = {(t, x) ∈ R4 : |t | + k x k < ℓ0 }
      for some length-scale ℓ0 > 0; see Fig. 1. All double cones are causally convex.
   7Recall that a Cauchy surface for O2 is a subset met exactly once by every inextendible timelike curve in O2 .

                                                         14
    • For technical reasons it is often useful to require that each A(O) is in fact a C ∗ -algebra, but
      we need not insist on this, nor even that the A(O) carry any topology. In the C ∗ -case, one
      would require A(M) to be generated in a C ∗ -sense by the local algebras – technically it is their
      C ∗ -inductive limit. In particular, the union O A(O) would be dense in A(M).
                                                    Ð

    • Sometimes (particularly in curved spacetimes) it is convenient to allow for local algebras
      indexed by unbounded (= noncompact closure) regions.
    • Einstein causality requires elements of algebras of spacelike separated regions to commute.
      Therefore Fermi ﬁelds can only appear in products involving even numbers of ﬁelds. We
      return to this later.
    • As mentioned, these are minimal requirements for AQFT but do not, by themselves, suﬃce
      to distinguish a quantum ﬁeld theory from other relativistic models.
    • Nothing has yet been said about Hilbert spaces, or about what algebraic states on the observable
      algebras are to be regarded as physical; we will discuss these issues later. Note that one can
      do quite a lot without ever going into Hilbert spaces. For example, let A(M) be the algebra of
      the free real scalar ﬁeld [see below], and let ω be a state on A(M). Then the smeared n-point
      function is
                  Wn ( f1, f2, . . . , fn ) := ω(Φ( f1 )Φ( f2 ) · · · Φ( fn )),     f1, . . ., fn ∈ C0∞ (M)
      and if this is suitably continuous w.r.t. the fi , it deﬁnes a distribution Wn ∈ D ′(Mn ). Here,
      Φ( f ) denotes a ‘smeared ﬁeld’ as will be described shortly. Therefore suﬃciently regular
      states ω deﬁne a hierarchy of distributional n-point functions, without ever using a Hilbert
      space. Here, as elsewhere in these notes, C0∞ (M) denotes the space of smooth, complex-valued
      functions on M with compact support (i.e., vanishing outside a bounded set).

4.2 Examples
We continue by giving some speciﬁc examples of ﬁeld theories in the framework of AQFT, drawing
out various lessons as we go.

Free real scalar field Consider the ﬁeld equation
                                                  ( + m2 )φ = 0                                              (23)
and let E + and E − be the corresponding retarded and advanced Green operators, i.e., φ = E ± f
solves the inhomogeneous equation
                                        ( + m2)φ = f                                     (24)
and the support of φ is contained in the causal future (+, retarded) or causal past (−, advanced) of
the support of f . Also deﬁne the advanced-minus-retarded solution operator E = E − − E + and
write                                      ∫
                               E( f , g) =   f (x)(E g)(x) dvolM (x) ,                          (25)
                                            M
where dvolM          4
              (x) ≡ d x. The integral kernel is familiar from standard QFT:
                                                          d 3 k sin k · (x − y)
                                                     ∫
                                    E(x, y) = −                                 ,                             (26)
                                                         (2π)3         ω
                              p
where k • = (ω, k), ω =           k k k 2 + m2 , and we use standard inertial coordinates on Minkowski
spacetime.

                                                           15
Exercise 13. Show that E(x, y)| y0 =x 0 = 0, and ∂y0 E(x, y)| y0 =x 0 = δ(x − y).

    To formulate the quantized ﬁeld in AQFT, we give generators and relations for the desired algebra
A(M), thus specifying it uniquely up to isomorphism. For completeness, a detailed description of
the construction is given in Appendix B. The generators are written Φ( f ), labelled by test functions
 f ∈ C0∞ (M) – for the moment this just a convenient way of writing them; there is no underlying ﬁeld
Φ(x) to be understood here. The relations imposed, for all test functions f , g ∈ C0∞ (M), are:

SF1 Linearity f 7→ Φ( f ) is complex linear

SF2 Hermiticity Φ( f )∗ = Φ( f )

SF3 Field equation Φ(( + m2 ) f ) = 0

SF4 Covariant commutation relations [Φ( f ), Φ(g)] = iE( f , g)1.

As a consequence of the identities in Exercise 13, SF4 is a covariant form of the equal time commu-
tation relations; a nice way of seeing this directly is to follow the on-shell Peierls’ method [Pei52]
to ﬁnd a covariant Poisson bracket for the classical theory. The axioms we have just stated may be
regarded as the result of applying Dirac’s quantisation rule to this bracket, with Φ( f ) regarded as
the quantization of the observable
                                                  ∫
                                        F f [φ] =     f φ dvolM                                   (27)

on a suitable solution space to the Klein–Gordon equation.
   One should check, of course, that the algebra A(M) is nontrivial. It is not too hard [though
we will not do this here] to show that the underlying vector space of A(M) is isomorphic to the
symmetric tensor vector space
                                    ∞
                                    Ê
                               C⊕          Q ⊙n,    Q = C0∞ (M)/PC0∞ (M),
                                    n=1

where P =  + m2 and ⊙ denotes a symmetrised tensor product. Therefore the nontriviality of
A(M) reduces to the question of whether the quotient space Q is nontrivial. The latter follows from
the properties of the Green operators, which can be summarised in an exact sequence [BGP07]
                                       P            E            P
                                                  ∞
                      0 −→ C0∞ (M) −→ C0∞ (M) −→ Csc         ∞
                                                     (M) −→ Csc (M) −→ 0,                         (28)

where the subscript sc denotes a space of functions with ‘spatially compact’ support, which means
that they vanish in the causal complement of a compact set. Together with the isomorphism theorems
for vector spaces, this gives

   Q = C0∞ (M)/im P = C0∞ (M)/ker E  im E = ker P = {φ ∈ Csc
                                                           ∞
                                                              (M) : Pφ = 0} =: Sol(M).            (29)

Thus Q is isomorphic to the space of smooth Klein–Gordon solutions with spatially compact
support, and is therefore nontrivial. Consequently, A(M) is a nontrivial unital ∗-algebra.
    Now deﬁne, for each causally convex open bounded O ⊂ M, the algebra A(O) to be the
subalgebra of A(M) generated by elements Φ( f ) for f ∈ C0∞ (O), along with the unit 1. Then it is
clear that, if O1 ⊂ O2 , then A(O1 ) ⊂ A(O2 ). Then properties A1, A2 are automatic. Next, because
E( f , g) = 0 when f and g have causally disjoint support (as E g is supported in the union of the
causal future and past of supp g) it is clear that all generators of A(O1 ) commute with all generators
of A(O2 ); hence A3 holds. Next, let ρ ∈ P0 . Then the Poincaré covariance of  + m2 and E can be

                                                    16
used to show that the map of generators α(ρ)Φ( f ) = Φ(ρ∗ f ), (ρ∗ f )(x) = f (ρ−1 (x)), is compatible
with the relations and extends to a well-deﬁned unit-preserving ∗-isomorphism

                                       α(ρ) : A(M) → A(M) .                                      (30)

Clearly α(ρ) maps each A(O) to A(ρO); as we also have α(σ) ◦ α(ρ) = α(σ ◦ ρ), condition A4
holds.
    Finally, let O1 ⊂ O2 such that O1 contains a Cauchy surface of O2 . Then any solution φ = E f2
for f2 ∈ C0∞ (O2 ) can be written as φ = E f1 for some f1 ∈ C0∞ (O1 ). An explicit formula is

                                              f1 = P χφ

where χ ∈ C ∞ (O2 ) vanishes to the future of one Cauchy surface of O2 contained in O1 and equals
unity to the past of another (since O1 contains a Cauchy surface of O2 , it actually contains many of
them). Then Φ( f2 ) = Φ( f1 ), which implies that A(O2 ) = A(O1 ) as required by A5.
    In fact this whole construction can be adapted to any globally hyperbolic spacetime, which is
the setting in which (28) was proved [BGP07]. Here, we recall that a globally hyperbolic spacetime
is a time-oriented Lorentzian spacetime containing a Cauchy surface.

Real scalar field with external source (van Hove encore) Let ρ ∈ D ′(M) be a distribution that
is real in the sense ρ( f ) = ρ( f ), and let φ ρ ∈ D ′(M) be any weak solution to ( + m2 )φ ρ = −ρ.
    The AQFT formulation of the real scalar ﬁeld with external source ρ is given in terms of the
same algebras A(O) as in the homogeneous case. The only diﬀerence is that we deﬁne smeared
ﬁelds
                                          Φ ρ ( f ) = Φ( f ) + φ ρ( f )1,
where Φ( f ) are the generators used to construct A(M) by SF1–SF4, and observe that they obey the
algebraic relations

vH1 f 7→ Φ ρ( f ) is complex linear

vH2 Φ ρ( f )∗ = Φ ρ( f )

vH3 Φ ρ(( + m2 ) f ) + ρ( f )1 = 0

vH4 [Φ ρ( f ), Φ ρ(g)] = iE( f , g)1

which are the relations that would be obtained from Dirac quantisation of the classical theory. Two
remarks are in order:

    • We see that the algebra is not so speciﬁc to the theory in hand – this is a general feature of
      AQFT: what is more interesting is how the local algebras ﬁt together and how the elements
      can be labelled by ﬁelds.

    • All the diﬃculties encountered in section 3 appear to have vanished. Actually, they have been
      moved into the question of the unitary (in)equivalence of representations of the algebra A(M).
      The separation between the algebra and its representations makes for a clean conceptual
      viewpoint.




                                                 17
Weyl algebra     We return to the real scalar ﬁeld and note two formal identities: ﬁrst, that

                                         (eiΦ( f ) )∗ = e−iΦ( f ) = eiΦ(− f )                            (31)

if f is real-valued; second, from the Baker–Campbell–Hausdorﬀ formula, that

                     eiΦ( f ) eiΦ(g) = eiΦ( f )+iΦ(g)−[Φ( f ),Φ(g)]/2 = e−iE( f ,g)/2 eiΦ( f +g) .       (32)

As there is no topology on A(M) we cannot address any convergence questions, so these are to be
understood as identities between formal power series in f and g. We may also note that Φ( f ) and
E( f , g) depend only on the equivalence classes of f and g in C0∞ (M)/PC0∞ (M)  Sol(M). Moreover,
the exponent in (32) is related to the symplectic product on the space of real-valued Klein–Gordon
solutions, SolR (M)  C0∞ (M; R)/PC0∞ (M; R) by

                                             σ([ f ], [g]) = E( f , g).                                  (33)

    These considerations motivate the deﬁnition of a unital ∗-algebra, generated by symbols W([ f ])
labelled by [ f ] ∈ C0∞ (M; R)/PC0∞ (M; R) and satisfying relations mimicking (31) and (32). In fact,
any real symplectic space (S, σ) determines a unital ∗-algebra, generated by symbols W(φ), φ ∈ S
and satisfying the relations:

W1 W(φ)∗ = W(−φ)
                             ′
W2 W(φ)W(φ′) = e−iσ(φ,φ )/2 W(φ + φ′).

It is a remarkable fact that this algebra can be given a C ∗ -norm and completed to form a C ∗ -algebra
in exactly one way (up to isomorphism) [BR97]. This is the Weyl algebra W(S, σ). In our case
of interest S = C0∞ (M; R)/PC0∞ (M; R), the symplectic form is given by (33), and we will denote the
corresponding Weyl algebra by W(M) for short. As before, we can form local algebras by deﬁning
W(O) as the C ∗ -subalgebra generated by W([ f ])’s with supp f ⊂ O and O being any causally
convex open bounded subset of M.

Exercise 14. In a general Weyl algebra W(S, σ), prove that W(0) = 1, the algebra unit.

    It is worth pausing to examine the explicit construction of the Weyl algebra W(S, σ). Consider
the (inseparable) Hilbert space H = ℓ 2 (S) of square-summable sequences a = (aφ ) indexed by
φ ∈ S, and deﬁne
                                                       ′
                                   (W(φ′)a)φ = e−iσ(φ ,φ)/2 aφ+φ′ .                           (34)
Obviously the W(φ)’s are all unitary. The Weyl algebra W(S, σ) is the closure of the ∗-algebra
generated by the W(φ)’s in the norm topology on B(H ), equipped with the operator norm.
                                                                                                     ′
Exercise 15. Check that (34) implies W(φ) = W(−φ)∗ and W(φ)W(φ′) = e−iσ(φ,φ )/2 W(φ + φ′).

Exercise 16. Let Ω ∈ ℓ 2 (S) be the sequence (δφ,0 ), where
                                                (
                                                  1 φ=0
                                         δφ,0 =
                                                  0 φ , 0.

If φ , φ′, show that W(φ)Ω and W(φ′)Ω are orthogonal and deduce that

                                             k W(φ) − W(φ′)k = 2.

This shows that there are no nonconstant continuous curves in the Weyl algebra.

                                                         18
    A corollary of the exercise is that one cannot diﬀerentiate λ 7→ W([λ f ]) within the Weyl algebra
in the hope of recovering a smeared ﬁeld operator, nor can we exponentiate iΦ( f ) within the algebra
A(M) to obtain a Weyl operator. The heuristic relationship W([ f ]) = eiΦ( f ) does not hold literally
in either of these algebras.

Exercise 17. Show that the GNS representation of the (abstract) Weyl algebra over symplectic
space (S, σ) induced by the tracial state ωtr (W(φ)) = δφ,0 coincides with the concrete construction
of a representation on H = ℓ 2 (S) given earlier, with the GNS vector Ωtr = (δφ,0 ), i.e., ωtr (A) =
hΩtr | AΩtr i.

Complex scalar field The algebra of the free complex scalar ﬁeld C(M) may be generated by
symbols Φ( f ) ( f ∈ C0∞ (M)) subject to the relations

CF1 Linearity f 7→ Φ( f ) is complex linear

CF2 Field equation Φ(( + m2 ) f ) = 0

CF3 Covariant commutation relations [Φ( f ), Φ(g)] = 0 and [Φ( f )∗, Φ(g)] = iE( f¯, g)1.

It is also usual to write Φ⋆( f ) := Φ( f¯)∗ , so that f 7→ Φ⋆( f ) is also complex-linear. This algebra
admits a family of automorphisms ηα given on the generators by

                                         ηα (Φ( f )) = e−iα Φ( f ),                                (35)

corresponding to a global U(1) gauge symmetry of the classical complex ﬁeld.

Exercise 18. Check that (35) extends to a well-defined automorphism for each α ∈ R. Show also
that there is an isomorphism between C(M) and the algebraic tensor product A(M) ⊗ A(M) of two
copies of the real scalar field algebra (with the same mass m) given on generators by
                                 1
                      Φ( f ) 7→ √ (Φr ( f ) ⊗ 1 + i1 ⊗ Φr ( f )) ,    f ∈ C0∞ (M),
                                  2
where we temporarily use Φr ( f ) to denote the generators of A(M). In this sense, the complex field
is simply two independent real scalar fields.

    We may identify local algebras C(O) in the same way as before, and within each of these, identify
the subalgebra Cobs (O) consisting of all elements of C(O) that are invariant under the global U(1)
gauge action. These are the local observable algebras.
    The reader may notice that the real scalar ﬁeld admits a global Z2 gauge symmetry generated
by Φ( f ) 7→ −Φ( f ), and that the theory of two independent real scalar ﬁelds with the same mass
admits an O(2) gauge symmetry, of which the U(1) symmetry corresponds to the SO(2) subgroup.
Why, then, do we not restrict the observable algebra of the real scalar ﬁeld, or further restrict the
observable algebras of the complex ﬁeld? The answer is simply that these are physical choices.
The U(1) gauge invariance of the complex scalar ﬁeld is related to charge conservation, while the
additional Z2 symmetry in the isomorphism O(2)  U(1) ⋊ Z2 corresponds to charge reversal. If
the theory is used to model a charge that is conserved in nature, but for which states of opposite
charge can be physically distinguished, then the correct approach is to proceed as we have done.




                                                    19
Dirac field One can proceed in a similar way to deﬁne an algebra F (M) with generators Ψ(u)
and Ψ+ (v) labelled by cospinor and spinor test functions respectively, and with relations abstracted
from standard QFT (this is left as an exercise). However, the resulting local algebras F (O) do not
obey Einstein causality – if u and v are spacelike separated then Ψ(u) and Ψ+ (v) anticommute. Of
course we do not expect to be able to measure a smeared spinor ﬁeld by itself, and what one can do
instead is consider algebras generated by second degree products of the spinor and cospinor ﬁelds,
labelled by (co)spinor test functions in supported in O. The resulting algebras A(O) then obey the
axioms A1–A5.
    Meanwhile, the algebras F (O) obey A1, A2, A4, A5 and a graded version of A3. We describe
them as constituting local field algebras, to emphasise the fact that they contain elements carrying
the interpretation of smeared unobservable ﬁelds. We will come back to the discussion of F (O)
and their relation to A(O) in section 8 on superselection sectors.

4.3 Quasifree states for the free scalar field
We have seen how local algebras for the free scalar ﬁeld may be constructed. As emphasised in
Sec. 2.2, however, this is only half of the data needed for a physical theory: we also need some states,
and (for many purposes) the corresponding GNS representations. These are nontrivial problems in
general: one needs to ﬁx the value of ω(A) and verify the positivity condition that ω(A∗ A) ≥ 0 for
every element A ∈ A(M); furthermore, while the GNS representation is fairly explicit, it evidently
involves a lot of work to do it by hand.
    Fortunately, in the case of free ﬁelds, there is a special family of quasifree states where quite
explicit constructions can be given. In particular, these states are determined by their two-point
functions and all the conditions required of a state can be expressed in those terms. Moreover, the
eventual GNS Hilbert space is a Fock space, and the smeared ﬁeld operators in the representation
may be given by explicit formulae. It is important to note that these include representations that are
unitarily inequivalent to the representation built on the standard vacuum state. Once again, many
of the arguments we will use carry over directly to curved spacetimes.
    Let W be any bilinear form on C0∞ (M) obeying
                         W( f , g) − W(g, f ) = iE( f , g),       ∀ f , g ∈ C0∞ (M)                 (36)
and which induces a positive semideﬁnite sesquilinear form on Sol(M) by the formula
                             w(E f , E g) = W( f , g),        ∀ f , g ∈ C0∞ (M).
In particular, W must be a weak bisolution to the Klein–Gordon equation so that w is well-deﬁned.
Exercise 19. Check that the positivity condition W( f¯, f ) ≥ 0 implies that W( f , g) = W(ḡ, f¯). Also
derive the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality
                       | Im w(φ, φ′)| 2 ≤ w(φ, φ)w(φ′, φ′),          φ, φ′ ∈ Sol(M).                (37)
    Under the above conditions, it may be proved (cf. Prop 3.1 in [KW91]) that there is a complex
Hilbert space H and a real-linear map K : SolR (M) → H so that K SolR (M) + iK SolR (M) is dense
in H and
                        hKE f |KE giH = W( f , g),       f , g ∈ C0∞ (M; R).                 (38)
(These structures are unique up to unitary equivalence.)
   The full construction is essentially explicit, but slightly involved. However, there is a particularly
simple and interesting case, arising when the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality (37) is saturated, i.e.,
                               | Im w(φ, φ′)| 2
                        sup               ′ ′
                                                =1        for all 0 , φ ∈ SolR (M),                 (39)
                        φ ′,0 w(φ, φ)w(φ , φ )


                                                     20
                             1       2      3      4        5    6     7       8



                                   Figure 2: An example graph in G8 .

where the supremum is taken over nonzero elements of SolR (M). This occurs if and only if
the quasifree state constructed below is pure. Under these circumstances, H is ﬁrst deﬁned as
a real Hilbert space by completing SolR (M) in the norm kφkw = w(φ, φ)1/2 with inner product
hφ1 |φ2 iw = Re w(φ1, φ2 ). Due to (39), H carries an isometry J deﬁned so that
                                 Im w(φ1, φ2 ) = hφ1 | Jφ2 iw,       φi ∈ H,
and which fulﬁls the conditions J 2 = −1, J † = −J. Hence J is a complex structure on H , and we
can make H into a complex Hilbert space in which multiplication by i is (annoyingly) implemented
by −J and the inner product is
                                   hφ1 |φ2 iH = hφ1 |φ2 iw + ihφ1 | Jφ2 iw .
(See Appendix A for more details.) The map K is just the natural inclusion of SolR (M) in H and it
is clear that K SolR (M) is dense in H (hence K SolR (M) + iK SolR (M) is also dense). Veriﬁcation
of (38) is left as an exercise.
    Returning to the general case, it may be shown that there is a state on A(M) given, as a formal
series in f , by
                               ω(eiΦ( f ) ) = e−W( f , f )/2, f ∈ C0∞ (M; R).                   (40)
Expanding each side of (40) in powers of f , and equating terms at each order, all expectation values
of the form ω(Φ( f )n ) are ﬁxed. Arbitrary expectation values may then be formed using multilinear
polarisation identities (see e.g., [Tho14] and references therein) and linearity. It may be shown that
all odd n-point functions vanish, while
                                                         Õ Ö
                             ω(Φ( f1 ) · · · Φ( f2n )) =     W( fs(e), ft(e) ),
                                                       G∈G2n e∈G

where G2n is the set of directed graphs with vertices labelled 1, . . . , 2n, such that each vertex is met
by exactly one edge and the source and target of each edge obey s(e) < t(e). An example for n = 4 is
given in Figure 2. Another characterisation of the n-point functions is that all the truncated n-point
functions vanish for n , 0, 2. This type of state is described as quasifree.
Exercise 20. Using (40), show that ω(Φ( f )2n+1 ) = 0 for all n ∈ N0 , while
                           ω(Φ( f )2n ) = (2n − 1)!! W( f , f )n,       ∀n ∈ N0 .
Deduce that the sequence µn = ω(Φ( f )n ) satisfies the growth conditions in the Hamburger moment
theorem. Therefore these are the moments of at most one probability measure – which is of course
a Gaussian probability distribution.
   Although we have called ω a state, it is not yet clear that it has the required positivity property.
This is most easily justiﬁed by noting that there is an explicit Hilbert space representation of A(M)
containing a unit vector whose expectation values match those of ω. To be speciﬁc, the Hilbert
space is the bosonic Fock space
                                                   Ê ∞
                                         F(H ) =        H ⊙n                                      (41)
                                                        n=0

                                                       21
over H , on which the ﬁeld is represented according to the formula
                           πω (Φ( f )) = a(KE f ) + a∗ (KE f ),            f ∈ C0∞ (M; R),                       (42)
and
                                  πω (Φ( f )) := πω (Φ(Re f )) + iπω (Φ(Im f ))
for general complex-valued f ∈ C0∞ (M). Here a(φ) and a∗ (ψ) are the annihilation and creation
operators on the Fock space which obey the CCRs
                                   [a(φ), a∗ (ψ)] = hφ|ψiH 1,           φ, ψ ∈ H,                                (43)
on a suitable dense domain in F(H ) (note that a is antilinear in its argument, and that a(φ) = a∗ (φ)∗ ).
Readers unfamiliar with the basis-independent notation used here should refer to Appendix C.
    We will not give a detailed proof of the claims (40–43), which would require consideration
of operator domains. At the level of formal calculation, however, it is easily checked that these
operators do indeed lead to a representation of A(M).
Exercise 21. Verify formally that f 7→ πω (Φ( f )) is C-linear, obeys the field equation in the sense
πω (Φ(P f )) = 0, and is hermitian in the sense that πω (Φ( f ))∗ = πω (Φ( f )).
      For the CCRs, we compute
[πω (Φ( f )), πω (Φ(g))] = (hKE f |KE giH − hKE g|KE f iH ) 1 = (W( f , g) − W(g, f )) 1 = iE( f , g)1,
using (43), (38) and (36). Finally, it may be veriﬁed that the Fock vacuum vector Ωω satisﬁes
                          hΩω |πω (Φ( f1 )) · · · πω (Φ( fn ))Ωω i = ω(Φ( f1 ) · · · Φ( fn )).
Consequently, ω is seen to be a vector state on A(M) and the quadruple (F(H ), Dω, πω, Ωω ) is its
GNS representation, where the dense domain Dω consists of ﬁnite linear combinations of ﬁnite
products of operators a∗ (KE f ) acting on Ωω .
   The ‘one-particle space’ H may be interpreted as follows. By (42), we see that
                          πω (Φ( f ))Ωω = a∗ (KE f )Ωω = (0, KE f , 0, . . .) ∈ F(H ),
which is an eigenstate of N with unit eigenvalue. Elements of H can be identiﬁed with (complex
linear combinations of) vectors generated from Ωω by a single application of the ﬁeld. Due to
assumption SF3, these vectors may be identiﬁed with certain complex-valued solutions to the
ﬁeld equation, which may be regarded as wavepackets of ‘positive frequency modes’ relative to a
decomposition induced by the choice of quasifree state.

Examples We describe two important examples. The Minkowski vacuum state8 ω0 is a quasifree
state with two-point function
                       d 3 k fˆ(−k)ĝ(k)
                   ∫                                                          ∫
                                                       •
       W( f , g) =                       ,     where k = (ω, k),      ĝ(k) =   d 4 x eik·x g(x),
                      (2π)3      2ω
          p
and ω = | k | 2 + m2 .9 The corresponding one-particle space is H = L 2 (Hm+, dµ), where Hm+ is the
hyperboloid k · k = m2, k 0 > 0 in R4 , and the measure of S ⊂ Hm+ is
                                                               (
                                     d 3 k χS (k)
                                 ∫
                                                                 1 k∈S
                         µ(S) =            3
                                                      χS (k) =
                                    (2π) 2ω                      0 otherwise.

    8A general deﬁnition of what a vacuum state should be will be given in Deﬁnition 25.
    9There is a notational conﬂict with the symbol used to denote states but it will always be clear from context which
is meant.

                                                          22
The map K : SolR (M) → H is
                                               KE g = ĝ|Hm+ ,
which already has dense range – as mentioned above, this signals that the vacuum state is pure.
Consequently, the vacuum representation π0 is given by

                        π0 (Φ(g)) = a(ĝ|Hm+ ) + a∗ (ĝ|Hm+ ) ,       g ∈ C0∞ (M; R),

which may be written in more familiar notation using sharp-momentum annihilation and creation
operators obeying (7) using

                           d3 k 1                                    d3 k 1
                        ∫                                         ∫
                                                   ∗                             ∗
           a(ĝ|Hm+ ) =        √   ĝ(k)a(k),    a   ( ĝ| H +) =        √ ĝ(k)a (k) .
                          (2π)3 2ω                          m
                                                                    (2π)3 2ω

Recalling that ĝ(k) = ĝ(−k) for real-valued g, we retrieve the ﬁeld with sharp position as the
operator-valued distribution

                                       d3 k 1 
                                   ∫                                         
                                                        −ik·x     ∗     ik·x
                       π0 (Φ(x)) =          √     a(k)e       + a   (k)e       .
                                      (2π)3 2ω

   Our second example is the thermal state of inverse temperature β, with two-point function

                                     d 3 k 1 fˆ(−k)ĝ(k) fˆ(k)ĝ(−k)
                                  ∫                                    
                   W β ( f , g) =                          + βω           .
                                    (2π)3 2ω 1 − e−βω          e −1

Here, Hβ = H ⊕ H with H as before, and (cf. [Kay85])

                                               (Kφ)(k)    (Kφ)(k)
                                 (K β φ)(k) = √          ⊕√
                                                1 − e−βω    e βω − 1
(remember that K β only has to be real-linear!). The range of K β E is not dense in Hβ , but its complex
span is, reﬂecting the fact that the thermal states are mixed.

Exercise 22. Check that the analogue of (38) holds for Hβ , K β and W β .

    A nice feature of the algebraic approach is that, while the representations corresponding to the
vacuum and thermal states are unitarily inequivalent, they can be treated ‘democratically’ as states
on the algebra A(M). There are many other quasifree states; indeed one can start with any state and
construct its ‘liberation’, the quasifree state with the same two-point function.
    All quasifree representations carry a representation π̃ω of the Weyl algebra as well, so that

                                         π̃ω (W([ f ])) = eiπω (Φ( f ))

and also
                                                    1 d
                                    πω (Φ( f )) =        W([λ f ])     .
                                                    i dλ           λ=0
Remember that these relationships cannot hold literally either in A(M) or W(M), but here we see
that they do hold in (suﬃciently regular) representations.
    Summarising, the quasifree states provide a class of states for which explicit Hilbert space
representations may be given with the familiar Fock space structure, and in which the Weyl operators
and smeared ﬁeld operators are related as just described.



                                                      23
5 The spectrum condition and Reeh–Schlieder theorem
In this section we begin to draw general conclusions about the properties of QFT in the AQFT
framework, proceeding from the basic axioms and additional requirements that will be introduced
along the way. We shall emphasise features that distinguish QFT from quantum mechanics. The
starting point is a more detailed discussion of the action of Poincaré transformations.

5.1 The spectrum condition
Assumption A4 required that the Poincaré group should act by automorphisms of A(M). An
important question concerning Hilbert space representations of the theory is whether or not these
automorphisms are unitarily implemented, i.e., whether there are unitaries U(ρ) on the representation
Hilbert space such that
                                 π(α(ρ)A) = U(ρ)π(A)U(ρ)−1 .
In such cases, we say that the representation is Poincaré covariant. As we now show, the GNS
representation of a Poincaré invariant state ω is always Poincaré covariant. Here, Poincaré invariance
of ω means that
                            ω(α(ρ)A) = ω(A),          ∀A ∈ A(M), ρ ∈ P0
(written equivalently as α(ρ)∗ ω = ω for all ρ ∈ P0 , with the star denoting the dual map). Of course,
the same question can be asked of any automorphism or automorphism group on a ∗-algebra.
Theorem 23. Let α be an automorphism of a unital ∗-algebra A. If a state ω on A is invariant
under α, i.e., α∗ ω = ω, then α is unitarily implemented in the GNS representation of ω by a unitary
that leaves the GNS vector invariant. Any group of automorphisms leaving ω invariant is unitarily
represented in Hω .
Proof. Observing that ω(α(A)∗ α(A)) = (α∗ ω)(A∗ A) = ω(A∗ A), we see that α maps the GNS ideal
Iω to itself. Therefore the formula
                                       U[A] = [α(A)]
gives a well-deﬁned map U from the GNS domain Dω to itself, which ﬁxes the GNS vector Ωω = [1]
and is obviously invertible (consider α−1 ). Now

                       hU[A]|U[B]i = ω(α(A)∗ α(A)) = ω(A∗ A) = h[A]|[B]i,

so U is a densely deﬁned invertible isometry, and therefore extends uniquely to a unitary on Hω .
The calculation

  πω (α(A))[B] = [α(A)B] = [α(Aα−1 (B))] = U[Aα−1 (B))] = Uπω (A)[α−1 B] = Uπω (A)U −1 [B]

shows that U implements α.
   If β is another automorphism leaving ω invariant, let V be its unitary implementation as above.
Then
                              UV [A] = [α(β(A))] = [(α ◦ β)(A)]
shows that UV implements α ◦ β.
    Among other things, this result may be applied to states that are translationally invariant.
Thermal equilibrium states, for example, are spatially homogeoneous but not Poincaré invariant
because they have a deﬁnite rest frame. Although typical states are not translationally invariant,
many interesting states are in a suitable sense local deviations from such invariant states. Even so,
not all invariant states are physically acceptable. One way of doing narrowing the ﬁeld is to require
the spectrum condition:

                                                 24
Definition 24. Let ω be a translationally invariant state so that the unitary implementation of the
translation group U(x) is strongly continuous, i.e., the map x 7→ U(x)ψ is continuous from R4
to Hω for each ﬁxed ψ ∈ Hω , where x = (x 0, . . . , x 3 ) ∈ R4 . By Stone’s theorem, there are four
commuting self-adjoint operators P µ such that (lowering the index using the metric)
                                                                     µ
                                                     U(x) = eiPµ x .

To any (Borel) subset ∆ ⊂ R4 we may assign a projection operator E(∆) corresponding to the
binary test of whether the result of 4-momentum measurement P µ would be found to lie in ∆. The
assignment ∆ 7→ E(∆) is a projection-valued measure, and in fact one can write
                                             ∫
                                               eipµ x dE(p• ).
                                                     µ
                                      U(x) =

The state ω is said to satisfy the spectrum condition if the support of E lies in the closed forward
cone V + = {p• ∈ R4 : p µ p µ ≥ 0, p0 ≥ 0}, i.e.,

                                                      supp E ⊂ V + .

This is sometimes expressed by saying that the joint spectrum of the momentum operators P µ lies
in V + .

    An important consequence of the spectrum condition is that the deﬁnition of U(x) can be
extended to complex vectors x ∈ R4 + iV + , with analytic dependence on x: to be precise, U(x) is
strongly continuous on R4 + iV + and holomorphic on R4 + i V + , where V + = intV + .
    One can check that the usual vacuum and thermal states of the free ﬁeld obey the spectrum
condition. More generally, we will make the following deﬁnition:

Definition 25. A vacuum state10 is a translationally invariant state obeying the spectrum condition,
whose GNS vector is the unique translationally invariant vector (up to scalar multiples) in the GNS
Hilbert space. The corresponding GNS representation is called the vacuum representation.

5.2 The Reeh–Schlieder theorem
We come to some general results that show how diﬀerent QFT is from quantum mechanics. For
simplicity, suppose that the theory is given in terms of C ∗ -algebras. Let Ω be the GNS vector of
a state obeying the spectrum condition (we drop the ω subscripts). Suppose the theory obeys the
following condition:

A6 Weak additivity
   For any causally convex open region O, π(A(M)) is contained in the weak closure11 of BO , the
   ∗-algebra generated by the algebras π(A(O + x)) as x runs over R4 .

Weak additivity asserts that arbitrary observables can be built as limits of algebraic combinations
of translates of observables in any given region O (as one would expect in a quantum ﬁeld theory).
In combination with the spectrum condition it has a striking consequence. Our proof is based on
that of [Ara99].
    10The term ‘vacuum’ is used in various ways by various authors,diﬀering, for example, on whether Poincaré invariance
is required as well. Somewhat remarkably, there is an algebraic criterion on the state that implies translational invariance,
the spectrum condition and (if the state is pure) that the there is no other translationally invariant vector state in its GNS
representation. See [Ara99].
    11A sequence of operators converges in the weak topology, w- lim An = A, if hψ| An ϕi → hψ| Aϕi for all vectors ψ
and ϕ.

                                                             25
Theorem 26 (Reeh–Schlieder). Let O be any causally convex bounded open region. Then (a)
vectors of the form AΩ for A ∈ π(A(O)) are dense in H ; (b) if A ∈ π(A(O)) annihilates the
vacuum, AΩ = 0, then A = 0.
    Part (a) says that Ω is cyclic for every local algebra; part (b) that it is also separating. The
existence of a cyclic and separating vector on a (von Neumann) algebra is the starting point of
Tomita–Takesaki theory (see, e.g., [BR87]).
    These are quite remarkable statements: if a local element of A(O) corresponds to an operation
that can be performed in O, it seems that we can produce any state of the theory up to arbitrarily
small errors by operations in any small region anywhere. To give an extreme example: by making
a local operation in a laboratory on earth one could in principle modify the state of the theory to
one approximating a situation in which there is a starship behind the moon, if such things can be
modelled by the theory (e.g., as a complicated state of the standard model). It is an expression of
how deeply entangled states in QFT typically are.
Proof. (a) Suppose to the contrary that the set of vectors mentioned is not dense. Then it has a
nontrivial orthogonal complement, so there is a nonzero vector Ψ ∈ H such that
                                  hΨ| AΩi = 0,            ∀A ∈ π(A(O)).
Now let O1 be a slightly smaller region with O1 ⊂ O. For any n ∈ N and any Q 1, . . ., Q n ∈ π(A(O1 ))
we have U(x)Qi U(x)−1 ∈ π(A(O)) for suﬃciently small |x|, whereupon
                  hΨ|U(x1 )Q 1U(x2 − x1 )Q 2U(x3 − x2 ) · · · U(xn − xn−1 )Q n Ωi = 0            (44)
for suﬃciently small x1, . . ., xn . By what was said above, the function
                      F : (ζ1, . . . , ζn ) 7→ hΨ|U(ζ1 )Q 1U(ζ2 )Q 2 · · · U(ζn )Q n Ωi
is a continuous function on (R4 )n extending to an holomorphic function in (R4 + iV + )n ⊂ (C4 )n ,
whose boundary value on (R4 )n moreover vanishes in some neighbourhood of the origin. The
‘edge of the wedge’ theorem [SW00, Vla66] implies that F vanishes identically in its domain of
holomorphicity, which means that the boundary value also vanishes identically. This means that
(44) holds for all xi , or put another way, that
                                              hΨ|BO Ωi = 0
where BO is the algebra generated by the algebras π(A(O1 + x)) for x ∈ R4 . By weak additivity,
we now know that hΨ|π(A(M))Ωi = 0. But Ωω is cyclic, so Ψ = 0. This proves the ﬁrst assertion.
For the second, suppose that A ∈ π(A(O1 )) annihilates Ω. Choose O2 causally disjoint from O1 ,
and note that for each ψ ∈ H and all B ∈ π(A(O2 )) we have
                              hA∗ ψ|BΩi = hψ| ABΩi = hψ|B AΩi = 0
using Einstein causality. By the ﬁrst part of the theorem, A∗ ψ is orthogonal to a dense set and
therefore vanishes; as ψ ∈ H is arbitrary we have A∗ = 0 and hence A = 0.
Corollary 27. All nontrivial sharp local binary tests (with possible outcomes ‘success’ or ‘failure’)
have a nonzero success probability in the vacuum state. (All local detectors exhibit ‘dark counts’).
Proof. A binary test can be represented by a projector P, with ‘failure’ corresponding to its kernel.
Suppose P ∈ π(A(O)) is a projector with vanishing vacuum expectation value, i.e., a zero success
probability. Then
                               kPΩk 2 = hPΩ|PΩi = hΩ|PΩi = 0,
so PΩ = 0 and hence P = 0 by the Reeh–Schlieder theorem (b).

                                                     26
Corollary 28. For every pair of local regions O1 and O2 there are vacuum correlations between
A(O1 ) and A(O2 ) (assuming dim H ≥ 1).

Proof. For suppose to the contrary that there are states ωi on A(Oi ) such that

                       hΩ|π(A1 )π(A2 )Ωi = ω1 (A1 )ω2 (A2 )       Ai ∈ A(Oi ).

By setting A1 = 1, and then repeating for A2 , this implies

                  hΩ|π(A1 )π(A2 )Ωi = hΩ|π(A1 )ΩihΩ|π(A2 )Ωi           Ai ∈ A(Oi )

Fixing A2 and letting A1 vary in A(O1 ), the Reeh–Schlieder theorem gives

                            π(A2 )Ω = hΩ|π(A2 )ΩiΩ,           A2 ∈ A(O2 )

which contradicts the Reeh–Schlieder theorem (a) unless dim H = 1.
    The correlations indicated by Corollary 28 become small at spacelike separation due to the
cluster property (a general feature of vacuum states in AQFT), which implies

                        hΩ|π(A1 )π(α(x)A2 )Ωi → hΩ|π(A1 )ΩihΩ|π(A2 )Ωi

as x → ∞ in spacelike directions, with exponentially fast convergence if the theory has a mass
gap, i.e., σ(P · P) ⊂ {0} ∪ [M 2, ∞) for some M > 0. See [Ara99, §4.3-4.4]. The Reeh–Schlieder
theorem does not present a very practical method for constructing starships.


6 Local von Neumann algebras and their universal type
So far, we have encountered AQFTs given in terms of ∗-algebras or C ∗ -algebras. The theory is
considerably enriched when expressed in terms of von Neumann algebras.
    Consider any net of local C ∗ -algebras O 7→ A(O) obeying A1–A5. Given any state ω on A(M),
form its GNS representation. For any open bounded causally convex O ⊂ M we can deﬁne an
algebra
                                        Mω (O) := πω (A(O))′′,
namely, the double commutant of the represented local algebra. Recall that the commutant is deﬁned
for any subalgebra B of the bounded operators B(H ) on Hilbert space H by

                              B ′ = {A ∈ B(H ) : [A, B] = 0 ∀B ∈ B}.

A basic result asserts that the algebra Mω (O) is also the closure of πω (A(O)) in the weak topology
of Hω – as such, and because it contains the unit operator and is stable under the adjoint, Mω (O) is
a (concrete) von Neumann algebra.

Exercise 29. Show that for any subalgebra B of B(H ) one has B ⊂ B ′′ and B ′′′ = B ′. Therefore
Mω (O)′′ = Mω (O).

    There is a good rationale for this construction. The norm topology of the C ∗ -algebra (which
coincides with the norm topology B(Hω ) in a faithful representation) is quite stringent: we have
already seen that there are no nonconstant continuous curves in the Weyl algebra. For example,
a Weyl generator diﬀers from all its nontrivial translates by operators of norm 2. The situation
is diﬀerent in the weak topology: if translations are implemented in a strongly continuous way
then matrix elements of an observable change continuously as the observable is translated. This

                                                 27
motivates the weak topology as a better measure of proximity than the norm topology. Note also
that Einstein causality implies that the commutant πω (A(O))′ contains all local algebras πω (A(O1 ))
where O1 is causally disjoint from O. As πω (A(O))′ = πω (A(O))′′′ = Mω (O)′, we see that also
Mω (O1 ) ⊂ Mω (O)′. It is natural to interpret Mω (O)′ in terms of (limits of) observables localised in
the causal complement of O and further natural to assume that there are no nontrivial observables
that can be localised both in O and its causal complement. This motivates an assumption that

                                       Mω (O) ∩ Mω (O)′ = C1,

that is, that the local algebras are factors, so called because an equivalent statement is that

                                     Mω (O) ∨ Mω (O)′ = B(H ),

i.e., Mω (O) and its commutant generate [in the sense of von Neumann algebras] the full algebra of
bounded operators on H .
     The connection to von Neumann algebras permits a vast body of technical work to be brought
to bear on AQFT, and indeed some of it was spurred by developments in AQFT. One of the most
striking examples is the 1985 result of Fredenhagen [Fre85] that for physically reasonably states
ω of reasonable theories obeying the AQFT axioms, every Mω (O) is a type III1 factor. Shortly
afterwards, Haagerup [Haa87] proved that there was a unique hyperfinite type III1 factor. A further
paper of Buchholz, D’Antoni and Fredenhagen [BDF87] pointed out the local algebras of QFT
are hyperﬁnite, therefore ﬁxing them uniquely up to isomorphism. Remarkably, the local algebras
themselves are completely independent of the theory! Therefore the distinction between diﬀerent
theories lies purely in the ‘relative position’ of the local algebras within the bounded operators on
Hilbert space.
     To appreciate these results and their consequences, we need to delve into the classiﬁcation of
von Neumann factors. Type I factors are easily deﬁned and familiar.

Definition 30. A von Neumann factor M on Hilbert space H is of type I if there is a unitary
U : H → H1 ⊗ H2 , for some Hilbert spaces Hi , so that M = U ∗ (B(H1 ) ⊗ 1H2 )U. The type is
further classiﬁed according to the dimension of H1 .

   One could say that type I factors are the natural playground of quantum mechanics: in an
obvious way, they are the observables of one party in a bipartite system. The result mentioned
above indicates that QFT prefers type III for its local algebras.

Definition 31. A von Neumann factor M on an inﬁnite-dimensional separable Hilbert space H is
of type III if every nonzero projection E ∈ M may be written in the form

                       E = WW ∗,        for some W ∈ M obeying W ∗W = 1H .

(It is then the case that every two projections E and F in M can be written as E = WW ∗ , F = W ∗W
for some W ∈ M.)

    Type III1 is a further subtype whose deﬁnition would take us too far aﬁeld, but it should already
be clear that types I and III are quite diﬀerent. The foregoing deﬁnitions are quite technical in nature.
However the proof that the local algebras have type III is founded on physical principles, namely that
(a) the theory should have a description in terms of quantum ﬁelds, (b) that the n-point functions
of these ﬁelds have a well-behaved scaling limit at short distances and (c) that there are no local
observables localised at a point, other than multiples of the unit. In more detail, the assumptions
are:


                                                   28
  (a) There is a dense domain D ⊂ Hω and a linear map φ from real-valued test functions to
      symmetric operators f 7→ φ( f ) deﬁned on D and obeying φ( f )D ⊂ D, so that φ( f ) has a
      closure aﬃliated12 to Mω (O) for any O containing supp f . Furthermore, the n-point functions
      of the ﬁelds φ( f ) deﬁne distributions

                                       Wn ( f1, . . ., fn ) = hΩω |φ( f1 ) · · · φ( fn )Ωω i.

  (b) Deﬁning scaling maps on test functions by (βp,λ f )(x) = f ((x − p)/λ), there should be a
      positive monotone function ν so that the scaling limit n-point functions

                                Wns.l. ( f1, . . ., fn ) = lim+ ν(λ)nWn (βp,λ f1, . . ., βp,λ fn )
                                                        λ→0

      exist and satisfy the (vacuum) Wightman axioms [SW00]. One may think of this theory as
      living in the tangent space at p; it is not usually the same theory as the one we started with.
                         Ñ
  (c) It is required that O∋p Mω (O) = C1, where the intersection is taken over all local regions
      containing the point p.

Assuming condition (a), we say that ω has a regular scaling limit at p ∈ M if the conditions (b) and
(c) hold. Fredenhagen’s result [Fre85] can now be stated precisely.

Theorem 32. Let O be a double-cone. If the state ω has a regular scaling limit at some point of
the spacelike boundary of O (i.e., its equatorial sphere) then Mω (O) has type III1 .

     Conversely, if any local von Neumann algebra of a double-cone has type other than III1 , then at
least one of the assumptions (b),(c) must fail at every point on its spacelike boundary, or (a) fails.
One application of this argument has been to prove that ‘SJ states’ of the free ﬁeld on double-cone
regions do not extend to Hadamard states on a larger region - typically because the stress-energy
tensor diverges as the boundary is approached [FV13]. We will say a little more about this below.
     Various key distinctions between quantum mechanics and QFT can be attributed to the diﬀer-
ences between factors of types I and III, and the fact that the local algebras of QFT are typically type
III. To conclude this section, we collect some properties of type III factors and their consequences
for QFT, gathered under some catchy slogans. We assume that the Hilbert space on which the type
III factors act is inﬁnite-dimensional and separable.

All eigenvalues have infinite degeneracy No type III factor can contain a ﬁnite-rank projection;
for if E is ﬁnite rank, then writing E = WW ∗ for an isometry W, we see that W ∗ EW = W ∗WW ∗W =
1H is also ﬁnite rank, contradicting our assumption on the dimension of H . It follows that no
self-adjoint element of a local algebra M(O) can have a ﬁnite-dimensional eigenspace, which is far
removed from the situation of elementary textbook quantum mechanics. In particular, if Ω is the
vacuum vector, then the projection |ΩihΩ| belongs to no local algebra M(O), nor to any commutant
Mω (O)′ [because the commutant of a type III factor is also of type III].

Local states are impure Any state ω on A(M) restricts in a natural way to a state ω|A(O) on each
local algebra A(O). What sort of state is it? To start, we note the simple:

Lemma 33. Suppose ω is a pure state on a C ∗ -algebra A. Then the von Neumann algebra
M = πω (A)′′ in the GNS representation of ω is a type I factor.
  12That is, in the polar decomposition φ( f ) = U|φ( f )| of the closure φ( f ) of φ( f ), the operator U and any bounded
function of |φ( f )| belong to Mω (O).


                                                            29
Proof. The GNS representation of a pure state is irreducible. So the commutant πω (A)′ consists
only of multiples of the unit, and M = B(H ), which is evidently type I.
   In the light of this result, it may not be so much of a surprise that:

Theorem 34. Under the hypotheses of Theorem 32, the algebra πω| A(O) (A(O))′′ is of type III.
Therefore ω|A(O) is not pure, nor is it a normal state in the GNS representation of a pure state
of A(O). Furthermore, in the case where Mω (O) is a factor, the previous statements hold if ω is
replaced by any state in its folium.

Proof. This requires a few standard results from von Neumann theory and can be found as Corollary
3.3 in [FV13].
   The SJ states mentioned above induce pure states and therefore it follows that they cannot be
induced as restrictions of states on A(M) with good scaling limit properties. See [FV13].

Local experiments can be prepared locally Suppose E is any projection in M(O) and let ω be
any state on the C ∗ -algebra formed as the closure of O M(O) in B(H ). By the type III property,
                                                      Ð
we may write
                                              E = WW ∗
for some isometry W ∈ M(O). Then the modiﬁed state (Exercise: check that it is a state!)

                                        ωW (A) := ω(W ∗ AW)

obeys
                                    ωW (E) = ω(W ∗WW ∗W) = 1
so the yes/no test represented by E is certainly passed in state ωW . On the other hand, if A ∈ M(O1 )
where O1 is causally disjoint from O, then A ∈ M(O)′ and so

                            ωW (A) = ω(W ∗ AW) = ω(W ∗W A) = ω(A).

So by changing the state in this way we can prepare a state with a desired property in our lab without
changing the rest of the world.
    For a brief survey of this and other features of type III factors and their relevance to QFT,
see [Yng05, Yng15].


7 The split property
The fundamental postulates of relativistic physics entail that two spacelike separated laboratories
should not be able to communicate. Consequently, an experimenter situated in one of these
laboratories should be able to conduct experiments independently of the actions (or even the
presence) of an experimenter in the other region. The Einstein causality condition A3 reﬂects
this idea, because any observable from one local algebra will commute, and be simultaneously
measurable, with any observable from the other. However, this is far from being the only way in
which the two regions must be independent. For example, the two observers should be able to prepare
their experiments for measurement independently, too. In quantum mechanics this independence is
modelled by assigning each of the two local systems their own Hilbert space, H1 and H2 , on which
the observables in the two laboratories respectively act. If the experimenters prepare states ψi , the
global state is then taken to be ψ1 ⊗ ψ2 on the tensor product H1 ⊗ H2 . This section describes


                                                  30
the split property which provides conditions under which a similar level of independence may be
established in QFT.
    First, we introduce some terminology: two von Neumann algebras M1 and M2 acting on a
Hilbert space H are said to form a split inclusion if there is a type I von Neumann factor N so that

                                           M1 ⊂ N ⊂ M2 .

By Deﬁnition 30, this means that there is a unitary U : H → H1 ⊗ H2 with N = U ∗ (B(H1 ) ⊗ 1H2 )U
for some Hilbert spaces H1 and H2 . The commutant of N is easily described:

                                      N′ = U ∗ (1H1 ⊗ B(H2 ))U

and it follows from the split inclusion that

                    M1 ⊂ U ∗ (B(H1 ) ⊗ 1H2 )U,           M2′ ⊂ U ∗ (1H1 ⊗ B(H2 ))U.

Suppose that states ω1 and ω2 are given on M1 and M2′ that may be expressed in terms of density
matrices ρi on Hi , so that

                 ω1 (A) = tr((ρ1 ⊗ 1H2 )U AU ∗ ),        ω2 (B) = tr((1H1 ⊗ ρ2 )UBU ∗ )

for A ∈ M1 , B ∈ M2′ . Then there is an obvious joint state

                                     ω(C) = tr((ρ1 ⊗ ρ2 )U AU ∗ )

with the property (Exercise: prove it!) that

                   ω(AB) = ω1 (A)ω2 (B) = ω(B A),           for all A ∈ M1, B ∈ M2′ .

With a little more technical work it can be shown that this construction is possible whenever ωi are
given as density matrices on H (see e.g., [Few16] for an exposition).
   Returning to QFT, we make the following deﬁnition.

Definition 35. A net O 7→ M(O) of von Neumann algebras has the split property if, whenever
O1 ⊂ O2 , the inclusion M(O1 ) ⊂ M(O2 ) is a split inclusion.

    Note that we only require a split inclusion when O2 contains the closure of O1 , so that there is
a ‘safety margin’ or collar around O1 within O2 . We can also make the less restrictive assumption
that the split inclusion holds when this safety margin has a minimum size, in which case one speaks
of the distal split property.
    If the split property holds, and O1 and O3 are spacelike separated pre-compact regions whose
closures do not intersect, then we may certainly ﬁnd a pre-compact neighbourhood O2 of O 1 within
the causal complement of O3 . Then M(O1 ) ⊂ M(O2 ) is split and M(O3 ) ⊂ M(O2 )′. It follows that
experimenters in O1 and O3 are able to independently prepare and measure observables of the ﬁeld
theory. Moreover, there is an isomorphism of von Neumann algebras

                                       ¯
                                 M(O1 )⊗M(O3 )  M(O1 ) ∨ M(O3 )

extending the map A ⊗ B 7→ AB, where the left-hand side is a spatial tensor product of von Neumann
algebras and the right-hand side is the von Neumann algebra generated by sums and products of
elements in M(O1 ) and M(O3 ).
    In situations where the Reeh–Schlieder theorem applies, and there is a vector that is cyclic and
separating for all causally convex bounded regions, the split inclusions have more structure and are

                                                    31
called standard split inclusions. A deep analysis by Doplicher and Longo [DL84] shows, among
many other things, that there is a canonical choice for the type I factor appearing in standard split
inclusions.
    The split property is enjoyed by free scalar ﬁelds of mass m ≥ 0 and the observable algebra
for the Dirac ﬁeld, but also for certain interacting models in 1 + 1-dimensions (see [Lec15] for a
survey and exposition). It is intimately connected to the way in which the number of local degrees
of freedom available to the theory grows with the energy scale. These are expressed technically in
terms of various nuclearity conditions, which we will not describe in detail here (but see [Few16]
for discussion and a relation to yet a further topic – Quantum Energy Inequalities). Instead, we limit
ourselves to some examples involving a theory comprising countably many independent free scalar
ﬁelds of masses mr (r ∈ N). It may be shown, for instance, that this theory has the split property if
the function
                                                    Õ∞
                                           G(β) :=      e−βmr /4
                                                  r=1

is ﬁnite for all β > 0 and grows at most polynomially in β−1 as β → 0+ . This is the case if mr = rm1 ,
for instance. On the other hand, if

                                       mr = (2d0 )−1 log(r + 1)

for some constant d0 > 0 then the series deﬁning G(β) diverges for β ≤ 8d0 . Further analy-
sis [DDFL87, Thm 4.3] shows that the split property fails in this situation, but that the distal split
condition holds provided that the ‘safety margin’ is suﬃciently large. For concentric arrangements
of double cones of base radii r and r + d, splitting fails if d < d0 and succeeds if d > 2d0 .
     The overall message is that a (well-behaved) tensor product structure across regions at spacelike
separation can only be expected in well-behaved QFTs and with a safety margin between the regions.
It turns out that the split property is closely related both to the existence of well-behaved thermal
states (absence of a Hagedorn temperature) and to whether the theory satisﬁes quantum energy
inequalities – see [Few16] for discussion and original references. Intuitively, the reason for this is
that there is a cost associated with disentangling the degrees of freedom between the two regions.
For example, a joint state ‘glued together’ from two states given on their local algebras might be
expected to have a higher energy than the sum of the two original energies, with the excess in energy
being higher if the ‘gluing’ has to take place over a smaller gap between the regions. If the number
of degrees of freedom available grows excessively with the energy scale, it becomes impossible to
achieve the gluing with a ﬁnite excess energy, or possible only if the regions are suﬃciently distant
from one another.


8 Superselection sectors
We come back to the discussion of superselection sectors, mentioned in section 2.1. In the algebraic
viewpoint on quantum theory, superselection sectors correspond to a class of unitarily inequivalent
representations of the algebra of observables. One of the major structural results in algebraic
quantum ﬁeld theory [DHR69a, DHR69b, DHR71, DHR74, DR89] was to show that these sectors
are related to irreducible representations of some compact Lie group G (the global gauge group).
The key idea of algebraic QFT is that all the relevant information is contained in the net of
observables, and from this net one can construct an algebra of ﬁelds F (O), which then contains
non-observable objects, e.g. smeared Dirac ﬁelds ψ( f ) (see section 4.2). This algebra is uniquely
fixed by the net and it carries the action of the gauge group G, so that local algebra A(O) consists
of elements of F (O) invariant under G. The reconstruction of both F and G is achieved through
the DHR (Doplicher–Haag–Roberts) analysis [DHR69a, DHR69b, DHR71, DHR74] together with

                                                  32
the Doplicher–Roberts reconstruction theorem [DR89]. The brief exposition in Sections 8.1-8.3 is
based on [Fre95].
    As motivating example, we consider the complex scalar field, whose algebra C(M) was described
in Sec. 4.2. Its vacuum representation π is given by

                                π(Φ(g)) = a(ĝ|Hm+ ) ⊗ 1 + 1 ⊗ a∗ (ĝ|Hm+ )
                               π(Φ⋆(g)) = a∗ (ĝ|Hm+ ) ⊗ 1 + 1 ⊗ a(ĝ|Hm+ )

for real-valued g [with Φ(g) = Φ(Re g) + iΦ(Im g) in general, compare with the real scalar ﬁeld
in Section 4.3], on F(H ) ⊗ F(H ), where H = L 2 (Hm+, dµ) and a∗, a are creation and annihilation
operators on the Fock space F(H ). The charge operator is

                                         Q = N ⊗1−1⊗ N,

where N is the number operator on F(H ) (see Appendix C for deﬁnition). The theory has a global
U(1) gauge symmetry generated by Q:

                            eiαQ π(Φ( f ))e−iαQ = e−iα π(Φ( f )),      α ∈ R,                       (45)

which implements the automorphisms ηα described earlier, and the Fock space decomposes into
charged sectors                                 Ê
                                F(H ) ⊗ F(H ) =       Hq,
                                                          q∈Z

each Hq being the eigenspace of Q with eigenvalue q. Assuming that Q is conserved in all
interactions available to the observer, the argument described in Sec. 2.1 shows that the observables
of the theory should commute with Q and be block-diagonal in this decomposition. Clearly, this is
not the case for the smeared ﬁelds π(Φ( f )) or π(Φ⋆( f )), which are consequently unobservable. On
the other hand, operators of the form π(Φ⋆( f )Φ( f )) is gauge-invariant, as is (any smearing of) the
Wick product of the ﬁeld π(Φ⋆(x)) with π(Φ(x)).
    The main point of interest for us is that the local observable algebras Cobs(O) are gauge-invariant
by deﬁnition and therefore π(Cobs (O)) consists of block-diagonal operators. More than that, we can
see that there are representations πq of Cobs(O) on each Hq , given by

                                          πq (A) = Pq π(A)Pq,

where Pq is the orthogonal projector onto Hq within F(H ) ⊗ F(H ). In particular, π0 is a represen-
tation in H0 , the charge-zero sector, which contains the vacuum vector Ω ⊗ Ω ∈ F(H ) ⊗ F(H ) and
will be called the vacuum sector for the observables.
    We now have a whole family of representations of the algebras Cobs(O) on diﬀerent Hilbert
spaces. It is easy to argue (at least heuristically) that these are mutually unitarily inequivalent,
because the charge operator itself can be regarded as a limit of local observables, i.e., local integrals
of the Noether charge density associated with the global gauge symmetry. Therefore, if there were
a unitary U : Hq → Hq ′ obeying πq′ (A) = Uπq (A)U −1 for all A ∈ Cobs (O) and all local regions O,
it would follow that the charge operators in the two representations should be equivalent under the
same mapping, giving
                                    q′1Hq ′ = qU1Hq U −1 = q1Hq ′
which can only happen in the case q′ = q. The physical distinction between diﬀerent sectors is
precisely that they have diﬀerent charge content, and the central insight of the DHR programme
is that the relevant charges might be gathered in some local region, outside which the distinction
can be, as it were, gauged away. An extra charged particle behind the moon ought not to change

                                                   33
our description of particle physics on earth.13 As we will describe this physical insight allows a
remarkable reversal of the process we have just followed: instead of starting with an algebra of
unobservable ﬁelds transforming under a global gauge group and obtaining from it a collection of
unitarily inequivalent representations of the algebra of observables, one starts from a suitable class
of representations of the observable algebras and attempts to reconstruct the unobservable ﬁelds
and the a unifying gauge group.

8.1 Representations of interest in particle physics
In the ﬁrst step of DHR analysis we want to single out a class of representations relevant for study
of superselection sectors. We focus on theories without long range eﬀects, for example strong
interactions in hadron physics. Loosely speaking, the representations of interest correspond to
states that are generated from the vacuum by (possibly unobservable) local ﬁeld operators. The
intuition is that these states have diﬀerent global charges (e.g. QCD charges) but which are localized
in compact regions.
    Let O 7→ A(O) be a net of C ∗ -algebras and let A be the quasilocal algebra (to reduce clutter,
we write A(M) ≡ A in this section). Let π0 be the vacuum representation (assumed here to be
faithful).
    We are interested in reconstructing the ﬁeld algebras F (O) realized as von Neumann algebras
of operators on some common Hilbert space Htot , i.e. F (O) ⊂ B(Htot ). We want them to satisfy
(among others) the following properties:
F1 F (O) carries a strongly continuous representation of the (covering group) of the Poincaré group
   and there exists a unique vector Ω ∈ Htot (up to phase) that is invariant under this action.
F2 There exists a compact group G (the gauge group) and a strongly continuous faithful represen-
   tation U of G in Htot such that the automorphism A 7→ αg (A) = AdU(g) (A) = U(g)AU(g)−1
   obeys
                               αg (F (O)) = F (O) ,   U(g)Ω = Ω ,
    and the U(g)’s commute with the representation of the Poincaré group mentioned above.
    On general grounds, the Hilbert space Htot decomposes into superselection sectors as:
                              Ê                           Ê
                      Htot =       H̃σ ⊗ Hσ ,      U(g) =     Uσ (g) ⊗ 1Hσ ,                                       (46)
                                       σ                                   σ

    where the sum is taken over equivalence classes σ of unitary irreps (H̃σ, Uσ ) of G, with
    representation space H̃σ and Hσ reﬂects the multiplicity with which these representations
    appear (including the possibility that Hσ has zero dimension, in which case σ does not appear).

F3 Reconstructing the observables: Htot carries a representation π of A(O) and

                       π(A(O))′′ = F (O) ∩ U(G)′ = {A ∈ F (O), αg (A) = A, ∀g ∈ G}.

    By construction, this representation decomposes w.r.t. (46) as
                                              Ê
                                          π=     1H̃σ ⊗ πσ
                                                          σ

    where each πσ is a representation of A(O) on Hσ . In particular, the representation correspond-
    ing to the trivial representation of G should coincide with π0 , the vacuum representation.
  13This picturesque statement applies to conﬁned charges rather than those with long range interactions such as electric
charges. We discuss this issue brieﬂy later on.

                                                          34
    The task of reconstructing the ﬁeld algebra therefore amounts to determining the relevant
representations πσ , and corresponding (irreducible) representations Uσ of G, which can then be
assembled to form Htot . It may be shown that the representations πσ of interest are those which
satisfy the following criterion (due to DHR [DHR71]):
Definition 36. A representation π of a net of C ∗ -algebras O 7→ A(O) is a DHR representation if it
is Poincaré covariant and the following holds:
                                               π A(O ′ )  π0 A(O ′ )                              (47)

for all double-cones14 O, where O ′ is the causal complement of O and  means unitary equivalence,
i.e. there exists a unitary operator between the appropriate Hilbert spaces V : H0 → Hπ such that
V π0 (A) = π(A)V for all A ∈ A(O ′).
    In the above deﬁnition, the region O ′ is unbounded, so A(O ′) is not given a priori in the
speciﬁcation of the theory. It is deﬁned to be the C ∗ -algebra generated by all local algebras A(O1 )
for bounded O1 ⊂ O ′.
    The intertwining unitary V has the interpretation of a charge-carrying field. To get some intuition
about these objects, consider the example of a complex scalar ﬁeld mentioned at the beginning of
this section. Consider a test function f ∈ C0∞ (M; R) with Φ⋆( f ) , 0. Firstly, we note that the charge
is related to the phase of the ﬁeld π(Φ⋆( f )), so in order to extract an intertwiner V , we consider
the polar decomposition π(Φ⋆( f )) = V f |π(Φ⋆( f ))|, where the overline denotes an operator closure.
The partial isometry V f may be taken to be unitary because π(Φ⋆( f )) is normal; acting on vectors
                                                  q                  q
in the vacuum sector H0 , it has the property V f π0 (A) = πq (A)V f , where A ∈ C(M) and πq is the
representation with charge q ∈ Z. We see that V f creates a single unit of charge and the support of
 f determines the region, where the charge is localized. If f is supported in a double cone O and
                                                                q −q
we take f1 supported inside another double cone O1 , then V f1 V f transports q units of charge from
O to O1 .
    There exists a generalization of the DHR framework to the situation, where charges are not
localized in bounded regions, but rather in cone-like regions (space-like cones formed as a causal
completions of spacial cones). This is relevant if one wants to apply this analysis to theories with
long-range interactions, e.g. quantum electrodynamics (QED). It is expected that the electron is a
charged particle with this type of localization. The corresponding version of the DHR construction
has been developed by Buchholz and Fredenhagen (BF analysis) in [BF82] and the full analysis of
superselection sectors for QED has been achieved in [BR14].
    We may now turn things around and phrase our problem as follows: starting with the abstract
algebra of observables and its vacuum representation we want to classify the equivalence classes
of its (irreducible) representations satisfying (47). Following the literature [Haa96, DHR69a,
DHR69b, DHR71, DHR74], we call each of these equivalence classes a superselection sector (also
called charge superselection sectors, whereupon the labels σ are referred to as charges, though they
need not be numbers).
    A special case is the situation where (Uσ, H̃σ ) is a one-dimensional representation. Remarkably,
such simple sectors are distinguished by the following property of πσ :
Definition 37. We say that a representation π satisﬁes Haag duality, if
                                     π(A(O ′ ))′′ = π(A(O))′ ∩ π(A)′′ ,                            (48)
for any double-cone O. If π is irreducible then the intersection with π(A)′′ is superﬂuous, whereupon
one also has
                                       π(A(O ′))′ = π(A(O))′′ .                                   (49)
  14The criterion can be weakened so as to refer to suﬃciently large double-cones.

                                                        35
(Exercise!)

    One can show that πσ satisﬁes Haag duality if and only if H̃σ is one-dimensional [DHR69a].
In particular, the vacuum sector is always simple; however, if the global gauge group is nonabelian,
there will necessarily be some non-simple sectors.

Exercise 38. If A is a C ∗ -algebra with Hilbert space representations π1 and π2 on Hilbert spaces
H1 and H2 , define the representation (π1 ⊕ π2 )(A) = π1 (A) ⊕ π2 (A) on H1 ⊕ H2 . Compute the
commutant (π1 ⊕ π2 )(A)′ and double commutant (π1 ⊕ π2 )(A)′′ within B(H1 ⊕ H2 ), which may
be regarded as consisting of 2 × 2 ‘block matrices’ of operators, and compare the results with
π1 (A)′′ ⊕ π2 (A)′′.

8.2 Localized endomorphisms
We now want to introduce some algebraic structures on the space of representations of interest,
following closely the exposition presented in [Fre95]. Our standing assumptions are that the
vacuum representation π0 is faithful and irreducible, satisﬁes Haag duality, and that the local
algebras π0 (A(O)) are weakly closed, π0 (A(O))′′ = π0 (A(O)), so they are actually von Neumann
algebras.15 Together with Haag duality, this gives

                                            π0 (A(O ′ ))′ = π0 (A(O))                                      (50)

for every double-cone O.
    Let us ﬁx a double cone O. Consider a representation π of A satisfying the DHR criterion with
a unitary V : H0 → Hπ implementing the equivalence in (47) for O, and deﬁne a representation π̃
on H0 by
                                 π̃(A) = V −1 π(A)V , A ∈ A .
Take O1 ⊃ O and A ∈ A(O1 ), B ∈ A(O1′ ). Since A(O1′ ) ⊂ A(O ′) and π̃ = π0 on A(O ′) (by the
DHR criterion), we have
                              [π0 (B), π̃(A)] = π̃([B, A]) = 0 ,
so π̃(A) ∈ π0 (A(O1′ ))′ = π0 (A(O1 )), where the last assertion follows from Haag duality (50). We
conclude that π̃(A(O1 )) ⊂ π0 (A(O1 )), so π̃(A) ⊂ π0 (A), as local operators are dense in A. Since
π0 is faithful, there exists an endomorphism ρ of the abstract C ∗ -algebra A with ρ = π0−1 ◦ π̃.
    There is an obvious equivalence relation on endomorphisms:

                                            ρ1 ∼ ρ2 ⇔ ρ1 = ι ◦ ρ2 ,                                        (51)

for some inner automorphism ι, i.e. one that can be written as ι(A) = AdU (A) = U AU −1 for some
unitary U ∈ A.
    Endomorphisms ρ obtained from representations satisfying the DHR criterion for a given O
have the following properties: [Fre95]
LE1 Localised in O: ρ(A) = A, A ∈ A(O ′ ).

LE2 Transportable: ∀O1, O2 with O∪O1 ⊂ O2 , there is a unitary U ∈ A(O2 ) with AdU ◦ρ(A) = A,
    A ∈ A(O1′ ), i.e. for every region O1 there exists an endomorphism equivalent to ρ under (51)
    that is localized in O1 .

LE3 ρ(A(O1 )) ⊂ A(O1 ), ∀O1 ⊃ O. In fact, this is a consequence of LE1 and LE2 by an argument
    similar to show π̃(A(O1 )) ⊂ π0 (A(O1 )) above.
  15If weak closure does not hold, one can apply this discussion to the net O 7→ M0 (O) := π0 (A(O))′′ .

                                                         36
                                 Õ1             O                 Õ2
                        Ô1            O1                  O2             Ô2




               Figure 3: Conﬁguration of doublecones in the proof of Proposition 41.

Changing the perspective, we can use the properties above as deﬁning properties for the following
class of endomorphisms of A:
Definition 39. Given a double-cone O, let ∆(O) be the set of all transportable endomorphisms of
                                                                                    Ð
A localised in O, i.e. those satisfying LE1 and LE2 (and hence LE3). We deﬁne ∆  O ∆(O).
   It can be shown that the equivalence classes ∆/∼ (where ∼ is given by (51)) are in one to
one correspondence with unitary equivalence classes of representations satisfying (47) (i.e. with
superselection sectors). ∆/∼ is equipped with a natural product (given by the composition of
endomorphisms of A), which induces a product on the space of sectors, namely:

                                         [π1 · π2 ]  [π0 ◦ ρ1 ρ2 ] ,                                      (52)

where πi  π0 ◦ ρi , i = 1, 2.
Exercise 40. Show that the composition of representations introduced in (52) is well defined and
the resulting representation satisfies the DHR criterion.
   It can also be shown (see e.g. [Fre95]) that the · product of two representations that are Poincaré
covariant and satisfy the spectrum condition also has these two features. The space of sectors
equipped with the composition product is a semigroup with the vacuum sector as the identity. One
can verify that simple sectors correspond to morphisms ρ that are in fact automorphisms of A, i.e.
ρ(A) = A. Hence the space of simple sectors equipped with · is a group.
   Transportability of endomorphisms LE2 is crucial for the DHR analysis, since it allows us to
“move morphisms around”. First we establish the following:
Proposition 41. Endomorphisms ρ are locally commutative, i.e. for O1 ⊂ O2′ and ρi ∈ ∆(Oi ) we
have ρ1 ρ2 = ρ2 ρ1 .
Proof. Fix an arbitrary double cone O and choose double cones Ôi , Õi , i = 1, 2 with the following
properties: Ôi ⊂ O ′, Ôi ∪ Oi ⊂ Õi , i = 1, 2 and Õ1 ⊂ Õ2′ (see Figure 3). LE2 implies that there
exist unitaries Ui ∈ A(Õi ) such that AdUi ◦ ρi = ρ̂i ∈ ∆(Ôi ), i = 1, 2. Hence for any A ∈ A(O) we
have ρi (A) = AdUi∗ ◦ ρ̂i (A) = AdUi∗ (A), as O is causally disjoint from both Ô1 and Ô2 and we have
also used LE3. Hence

      ρ1 ρ2 (A) = ρ1 ◦ AdU2∗ (A) = Ad ρ1 (U2∗ ) ◦ AdU1∗ (A) = AdU2∗ U1∗ (A) = AdU1∗U2∗ (A) = ρ2 ρ1 (A) ,

where we used LE1 to conclude that ρ1 (U2∗ ) = U2∗ , while U1∗U2∗ = U2∗U1∗ follows from A3. We can
repeat the same reasoning for any double cone O, so ρ1 ρ2 = ρ2 ρ1 .

                                                     37
     We can now use this result to show that the product of representations is commutative, i.e.
[π1 · π2 ] = [π2 · π1 ]. Let ρ1, ρ2 ∈ ∆(O) and take two spacelike separated double cones O1 , O2 . By
LE2 there are morphisms ρ̃i , i = 1, 2 localized in Oi and unitaries Ui , i = 1, 2 such that ρ̃i = AdUi ◦ ρi .
It follows by Prop. 41 that

                   ρ2 ρ1 = Ad ρ2 (U1∗ )U2∗ ◦ ρ̃2 ρ̃1 = Ad ρ2 (U1∗ )U2∗ ◦ ρ̃1 ρ̃2 = Adε(ρ1,ρ2 ) ◦ ρ1 ρ2 ,

with the unitary
                                     ε(ρ1, ρ2 ) = ρ2 (U1∗ )U2∗U1 ρ1 (U2 ) ∈ A .                             (53)
This proves the equivalence of ρ2 ρ1 and ρ1 ρ2 , so the commutativity of the product of representations
follows. Hence the space of all sectors, equipped with · is an abelian semigroup and the space of all
simple sectors equipped with · is an abelian group.
    The unitary operator ε(ρ1, ρ2 ) that we have discovered here is called the statistics operator. It
depends only on ρ1 , ρ2 and not on ρ̃i nor the choice of Ui , i = 1, 2.
    Let ε ρ ≡ ε(ρ, ρ). In spacetime dimension d > 2 we have ε 2ρ = id. For simple sectors π0 ◦ ρ2
is irreducible, so ε ρ is a multiple of 1 and in d > 2 this implies that ε ρ = ±1. Physically this
corresponds to the alternative between Fermi and Bose statistics. For general sectors in d > 2 one
can also have para-statistics or even inﬁnite statistics. In lower dimensions (d ≤ 2), ε ρ is instead
related to representations of the braid group. This kind of behaviour appears also for cone-localized
charges (BF analysis), but in this case the braided statistics appears already in d ≤ 3. More details
relating ε ρ to statistics will be given in the next section.
    The physical interpretation of the product of representations can be understood as follows
[DHR71]. Let ω0 be the vacuum state and ρi ∈ ∆(Oi ), i = 1, 2. We have the two states ωi = ω0 ◦ ρi ,
which are vector states in their respective representations π = π0 ◦ ρi ; indeed, one suitable vector is
the vacuum vector Ω that is the GNS vector induced by ω0 . Clearly, ω = ω0 ◦ ρ1 ρ2 is a vector state
in representation [π1 · π2 ], with the same representing vector. Let O1 be spacelike to O2 . Then ω
looks like the vector state ω0 ◦ ρ1 with respect to observations in O2′ and like ω0 ◦ ρ2 for observations
in O1′ . Hence, taking the product [π1 · π2 ] has a physical interpretation of composing two vector
states that are localized “far apart”.

8.3 Intertwiners and permutation symmetry
As stated in the previous section, states ω0 ◦ ρ k , k = 1, . . ., n obtained from transportable localized
morphisms ρ k ∈ ∆ are interpreted as vector states corresponding to localized charged particles and
composition of morphisms describes creating several such charges in spacetime. Now we want
to understand how one may create these charges in a given order. As the state ω0 ◦ ρ1 . . . ρn is
independent of the ordering of the ρ k ’s, this must be done by permuting a family of vectors all of
which representing this state. In order to do this, we need some notation.

Definition 42. Let ρ, σ ∈ ∆. Deﬁne the space of intertwiners between ρ and σ by16

                               (σ, ρ)  {T ∈ A| σ(A)T = T ρ(A), ∀ A ∈ A} .

    We can now deﬁne some algebraic operations on intertwiners. Let S ∈ (τ, σ) and T ∈ (σ, ρ) be
intertwiners. We can compose them to obtain ST ∈ (τ, ρ) and can also deﬁne the adjoint T ∗ ∈ (ρ, σ).
Moreover, there is a natural product between intertwiners in diﬀerent spaces. Let T1 ∈ (σ1, ρ1, ) and
T2 ∈ (σ2, ρ2 ). We deﬁne T1 × T2 ∈ (σ1 σ2, ρ1 ρ2 ) as

                                         T1 × T2  T1 ρ1 (T2 ) = σ1 (T2 )T1
  16In [DHR71, DHR74] the intertwiners are denoted by T ≡ (σ|T | ρ), to emphasize to which space they belong.


                                                           38
(using the fact that T1 ∈ (σ1, ρ1 ) for the last equality). The ×-product is associative, and distributive
with respect to the composition of intertwiners (i.e., their product in A).
    Next we discuss localization properties of the intertwiners. Consider T ∈ (σ, ρ), where ρ is
supported in O1 and σ in O2 . We call O2 the left support and O1 the right support of the intertwiner
T. If A ∈ A(O1′ ) ∩ A(O2′ ), then the support and intertwining properties imply

                                      T A = T ρ(A) = σ(A)T = AT

so T is bilocal, in the sense that T ∈ (A(O1′ ) ∩ A(O2′ ))′ (here the commutant is taken in A). In the
case O1 = O2 = O, we have T ∈ A(O) by Haag duality (50) in the vacuum representation and the
assumption that π0 is faithful.
    We call two intertwiners causally disjoint if their right supports lie space-like to each other and
the same holds for their left supports.
Proposition 43. Let Ti ∈ (σi, ρi ), where ρi, σi ∈ ∆(Oi ), i = 1, 2, with O1 and O2 spacelike separated
(i.e. T1 and T2 are causally disjoint), then

                                            T1 × T2 = T2 × T1 .

Proof. To see this, note that Ti ∈ A(Oi ), so T1 × T2 = T1 ρ1 (T2 ) = T1T2 = σ2 (T1 )T2 = T2 × T1 .
    The statistics operator ε ρ is also an intertwiner and it has a nice expression in terms of products
of other intertwiners.
Exercise 44. Let ρ1, ρ2 ∈ ∆(O) and ρ̃i = Ui ρi Ui−1 , i = 1, 2, as in the construction leading to (53).
Show that ε(ρ1, ρ2 ) ∈ (ρ2 ρ1, ρ1 ρ2 ) and

                                    ε(ρ1, ρ2 ) = (U2∗ × U1∗ )(U1 × U2 ) .

    Clearly, ε ρ ∈ (ρ2, ρ2 ), which means that ε ρ commutes in A with every element of ρ2 A,
ε ρ ∈ (ρ2 A)′, and therefore π0 (ε ρ) commutes with all observables in the representation π0 ◦ ρ2 .
    Now take Ti ∈ (σi, ρi ), where ρi, σi ∈ ∆, i = 1, 2. One can also easily check (Exercise) that

                                ε(σ1, σ2 )(T1 × T2 ) = (T2 × T1 )ε(ρ1, ρ2 ) ,                           (54)

so in particular, for σ1 = σ2 and ρ1 = ρ2 , we have

                                       εσ (T1 × T2 ) = (T2 × T1 )ε ρ .

Hence ε changes the order of factors in ×-product.
Exercise 45. Prove (54). You will need to use Proposition 43.

   Using ε ρ, we can construct a representation ε (n)
                                                    ρ of the braid group for each ρ. The braid group
Bn with n strands is the group generated by ς1, . . . ςn−1 with relations:

                                         ςi ς j = ς j ςi , if |i − j | > 2 ,
                                    ςi ςi+1 ςi = ςi+1 ςi ςi+1 .

Let ςi , i ∈ {1, . . ., n − 1} be a generator of Bn , then we set ε (n)
                                                                    ρ (ςi )  ρ
                                                                               i−1 ε . The following exercise
                                                                                    ρ
shows that this is indeed a representation of the braid group.
Exercise 46. Show that ε ρ ρ(ε ρ) = ε(ρ2, ρ) and use this together with (54) to prove ε ρ ρ(ε ρ)ε ρ =
ρ(ε ρ)ε ρ ρ(ε ρ).

                                                      39
    In d > 2, this also gives us a representation of the permutation group Sn (as ε 2ρ = 1). In the more
detailed analysis that follows we will focus on the d > 2 case and we refer the reader to [FRS89]
                              (n)
for the general case. Let ε ρ (P) denote the representative of P ∈ Sn . More generally, we may also
deﬁne ε(ρ1, . . ., ρn ; P) ∈ (ρP−1 (1) . . . ρP−1 (n), ρ1 . . . ρn ) by

                                      ε(ρ1, . . ., ρn ; P) := U ∗ (P)U(e) ,

where (in analogy with the n = 2 case) ρ̃i = Ui ρi Ui−1 are auxiliary morphisms localized in spacelike
separated regions Oi , i = 1 . . ., n and we use the notation U(P) := UP−1 (1) × · · · × UP−1 (n) . One can
easily check (Exercise) that ε(ρ, . . . , ρ; P) = ε (n)
                                                    ρ (P). Note that in n = 2 case we implicitly have
ε(ρ1, ρ2 ; τ) ≡ ε(ρ1, ρ2 ), where τ is the transposition of 1 and 2. Property (54) generalizes to:

                              ε(σ1 . . . , σn ; P)T (e) = T (P)ε(ρ1, . . . , ρn ; P) ,

where Ti ∈ (σi, ρi ) i = 1, . . ., n. If σi = σ, ρi = ρ for all i = 1, . . . , n, we have

                                         εσ(n) (P)T (e) = T (P)ε (n)
                                                                 ρ (P) .


    To understand better the physical interpretation of ε (n)
                                                           ρ (P), ﬁx a morphism ρ and consider a
family of intertwiners Uk ∈ (σk , ρ), where σk are morphisms localized in spacelike separated
regions Ok , k = 1, . . ., n. Let Ω ∈ H0 be the vacuum vector. Clearly,

      π0 (Uk∗ )Ω, π0 (ρ(A))π0 (Uk∗ )Ω = Ω, π0 (Uk ρ(A)Uk∗ )Ω = hΩ, π0 (σk (A))Ωi = ω0 ◦ σk (A) ,

so ω0 ◦ σk is a vector state on ρA with the distinguished vector π0 (Uk∗ )Ω.
   Now consider vectors of the form

                                      ΨP = π0 (U ∗ (P))Ω ,          P ∈ Sn,

which can be interpreted as a product of n state vectors with identical charge quantum numbers but
                                                    (n)
with an ordering determined by P. The operator ε ρ (Q) changes the order of factors in this vector
                                          (n)
[DHR71]. To see this, recall that Q 7→ ε ρ (Q) ∈ A is a unitary representation of Sn , whereupon
           (n)
ΨP = π0 (ε ρ (P)U ∗ (e))Ω and
                   (n)                 (n)     (n)                        (n)
              π0 (ε ρ (Q))ΨP = π0 (ε ρ (Q)ε ρ (P)U ∗ (e))Ω = π0 (ε ρ (QP)U ∗ (e))Ω = ΨQP

Maybe: Each vector ΨP induces the same state on ρn A, namely ω0 ◦ σ1 . . . σn . Therefore, the
            (n)
action of εQ is analogous to permutations of the wave functions of n identical particles in quantum
mechanics, which also leaves expectation values of observable quantities unchanged.
    In the next step one introduces the notion of a conjugate sector. Physically, the relation between
a sector and its conjugate is that of having a charged particle localized in some compact region
versus having the corresponding antiparticle localized in that region. We have already mentioned
that sectors can be equipped with the structure of a semigroup and simple sectors form a group.
In the latter case, the conjugate sector is just given by the group inverse ε ρ = ±1, so we have the
simple fermion/boson alternative.
    More generally, to obtain a left inverse to a given ρ, we want to ﬁnd a map φ : A → A with

                         φ(ρ(A)Bρ(C)) = Aφ(B)C ,             φ(A∗ A) ≥ 0 ,      φ(1) = 1 .

Note that φ on ρ(A) can be set as ρ−1 . We then use the Hahn-Banach theorem to extend the state
ω0 ◦ ρ−1 on ρ(A) to A. Let (π, H, Ω) be the corresponding GNS triple and deﬁne an isometry

                                                        40
V : H0 → H , by means of V AΩ = π ◦ ρ(A)Ω̃. We then deﬁne the left inverse of the given sector ρ
as φ(A) = V ∗ π(A)V .
    The left inverse is used to study the representations of the permutation group in d > 2 (or the
braid group in low dimensions). We note that

                           φ(ε ρ )ρ(A) = φ(ε ρ ρ2 (A)) = φ(ρ2 (A)ε ρ ) = ρ(A)φ(ε ρ ) ,

which for irreducible ρ implies
                                                   φ(ε ρ ) = λ ρ1 ,
where λ ρ is the statistics parameter and it characterizes the statistics of the sector ρ. One ﬁnds that
the allowable values for this parameter are:

    • λ = d1 , d ∈ N giving para Bose statistics of order d;

    • λ = − d1 , d ∈ N is giving para Fermion statistics of order d;

    • λ = 0, giving inﬁnite statistics.

In DHR theory, d is called the statistical dimension.17
    To obtain the sector ρ conjugate to a given sector [ρ], one shows (under appropriate, physically
motivated assumptions, including the ﬁnite statistics λ , 0 [DHR71]) that π satisﬁes the DHR
criterion, so there exists a morphism ρ ∈ ∆(O) such that π = π0 ◦ ρ and an isometry R such that
ρρ(A)R = RA.
    In fact, in the language of category theory, localized morphisms and intertwiners form a sym-
metric (or braided in d < 2) monoidal category, where the monoidal structure is given by ×. The
existence of conjugate sectors (unique up to equivalence) means that the category is rigid.
    The reconstruction theorem of Doplicher and Roberts [DR89] allows one to reconstruct the ﬁeld
net F (O) and the gauge group G from the above data completing the programme set out in Sec. 8.1.
Abstractly, ﬁrstly they show the equivalence of the DHR category to a category of representations
of some compact group and then reconstruct the group from that category (this step is a version of
the Tannaka–Krein duality), together with the algebra of ﬁelds on which this group acts.


9 Conclusions
In these notes, we have summarized some important aspects of quantum ﬁeld theory in the algebraic
formulation of Haag and Kastler, focusing on the features that make it very diﬀerent from quantum
mechanics. One such feature is the existence of inequivalent representations. This was illustrated
by the case study of the van Hove model in Section 3, and further emphasized in Section 8, where
inequivalent representations corresponding to diﬀerent charges were discussed. In both situations,
one can see that all the physical information can be recovered from the abstract net of algebras, so it
is more advantageous to think of the net rather than the collection of Hilbert space representations
as the fundamental object. The axioms for the net have been formulated in Section 4.1, followed
by some simple examples in Section 4.2. The connection between the algebraic and the Hilbert
space centred approaches can be made through the choice of an algebraic state. In particular, for
QFT on Minkowski spacetime18, one can consider the distinguished Poincaré invariant state, the
vacuum; we have also described the more general class of quasi-free states that can be speciﬁed by
  17Mathematically, as discovered by Longo in [Lon89], d is in fact the square root of the Jones index of the inclusion
ρ(A(O)) ⊂ ρ(A(O ′ ))′ , i.e. it quantiﬁes how badly is the Haag duality broken in the given sector.
  18Here we focused only on QFT on Minkowski spacetime, but the algebraic approach also easily generalizes to curved
spacetimes [BFV03, FV15, FR16].


                                                         41
their two-point functions and have Fock space representations. In Section 5, we showed that QFT
in the vacuum representation has some peculiar features that make it very diﬀerent from quantum
mechanics, the most dramatic being the Reeh-Schlieder theorem.
     A net of C ∗ -algebras together with a state induces a net of von Neumann algebras via weak
completion. In Section 6 we pointed out that the type of von Neumann algebras that arise in QFT
(type III) is very diﬀerent from the type characteristic for quantum mechanics (type I). We discussed
the main consequences of this fact in Section 7, in the context of independence of measurements by
spacelike observers, in the guise of the split property.
     To close, let us emphasize that AQFT, although very diﬀerent from quantum mechanics, is not to
be regarded as disjoint from “traditional” QFT as presented in standard textbooks. To the contrary,
it is a framework that allows one to derive and study common structural and conceptual features of
QFT, which then become realized in physical, experimentally testable models.


A Some basic functional analysis
A general reference for this brief summary is [RS80]. Recall that a Hilbert space H is a complex
inner product space, with an inner product h·|·i that isplinear in the second slot and conjugate-linear
in the ﬁrst, and for which the associated norm kψk := hψ|ψi is complete, i.e., all Cauchy sequences
converge. The Hilbert space is separable if it has a ﬁnite or countably inﬁnite orthonormal basis,
and inseparable otherwise.
    A linear operator A : H1 → H2 between Hilbert spaces H1 and H2 is bounded iﬀ k Ak 
sup k x k1 =1 k Axk2 is ﬁnite, where we use the subscript to denote the Hilbert space norm concerned.
For maps between Hilbert spaces, boundedness and continuity are equivalent properties. In this
case A has an adjoint A∗ : H2 → H1 , with the deﬁning property
                                        hϕ| Aψi2 = hA∗ ϕ|ψi1 ,                                    (55)
for all ψ ∈ H1 , ϕ ∈ H2 . Several interesting classes of bounded operator may be deﬁned: a bounded
operator A : H → H is self-adjoint if A = A∗ ; while A is a projection if A = A∗ = A2 (more strictly,
this deﬁnes an ‘orthogonal projection’ but we follow common usage in simply saying ‘projection’).
A bounded operator U : H1 → H2 is unitary if U ∗U = UU ∗ = 1, and a partial isometry if U ∗U
and UU ∗ are projections. Every bounded operator A : H → H has a unique polar decomposition
A = U| A| such that U is a partial isometry with ker U = ker A, and | A| is a positive operator such
that | A| 2 = A∗ A. Here, a self-adjoint operator A : H → H is said to be positive if hψ| Aψi ≥ 0 for
all ψ ∈ H . For obvious reasons | A| is called the positive square root of A∗ A. An operator A on H
                                Í
is said to be of trace class if α heα | | A|eα i is ﬁnite, where eα is some orthonormal basis of H ; in
                             Í
this case, the trace tr A := α heα | Aeα i is ﬁnite and independent of the basis used to compute it.
    If A is a partially deﬁned linear map between Hilbert spaces H1 and H2 , we denote its domain
of deﬁnition within H1 by D(A). We typically only consider the situation where D(A) is dense.
If sup{k Axk2 : x ∈ D(A), k xk1 = 1} is ﬁnite, then A can be extended by continuity to a unique
bounded operator from H1 to H2 ; otherwise, A is described as an unbounded operator. The adjoint
A∗ of a densely deﬁned unbounded operator A is again deﬁned through (55) and D(A∗ ) is the set of
all ϕ ∈ H for which this deﬁnition makes sense: ϕ ∈ D(A∗ ) if and only if there exists η ∈ H such
that hϕ| Aψi = hη|ψi holds for all ψ ∈ D(A), whereupon we write A∗ ϕ = η. An unbounded densely
deﬁned operator A is called self-adjoint if hϕ| Aψi = hAϕ|ψi for all ϕ, ψ ∈ D(A) and in addition
D(A∗ ) = D(A). Any operator is completely described by its graph
                              Γ(A) := {(x, Ax) ∈ H × H : x ∈ D(A)}.
One says that A is a closed operator if Γ(A) is a closed subset of H × H with respect to the norm
of H ⊕ H ; it is closable if Γ(A) has a closure that is the graph of some (closed) operator A, which

                                                  42
is naturally called the closure of A. All densely deﬁned operators with densely deﬁned adjoints are
closable and their adjoints are closed, so in particular self-adjoint operators are closed. The polar
decomposition extends to closed operators.
    The spectrum σ(A) of a (bounded or unbounded) operator A on a Hilbert space H is the set of
z ∈ C for which A − z1 fails to have a bounded two-sided inverse. In particular, eigenvalues lie in
the spectrum but not every spectral point is an eigenvalue. The spectrum of a self-adjoint operator
is real, σ(A) ⊂ R, while the spectrum of a unitary operator lies on the unit circle in C.
    Finally, suppose that H is a real Hilbert space (i.e., a real inner product space with a complete
induced norm). To distinguish real spaces from complex ones in this appendix, we write the real
inner product with round brackets and the adjoint with a dagger. A complex structure on H is a
linear map J : H → H obeying J 2 = −1, J † = −J. Then we may convert H into a complex
Hilbert space by adding two structures: ﬁrst, the operation of multiplication by a complex scalar,
                           C × H ∋ (z, ψ) 7→ (Re z)ψ − (Im z)Jψ ∈ H,
in which sense multiplication by i is implemented by −J (this convention is annoying but avoids
a proliferation of minus signs elsewhere in the main body of the text), and second, a sesquilinear
inner product
                                    hψ|ϕi = (ψ, ϕ) + i(ψ, Jϕ).
Exercise 47. Check that H , with these additional structures, is indeed a complex Hilbert space.


B Construction of an algebra from generators and relations
Several algebras encountered in Sec. 4.2 were presented in terms of generators and relations. Here,
we give more details on how an algebra may be constructed in this way, taking the real scalar ﬁeld
as our example.
    • First consider the free unital ∗-algebra U containing arbitrary ﬁnite linear combinations of
      ﬁnite products of the Φ( f )’s and Φ( f )∗ ’s and unit 1.
    • Construct a two-sided ∗-ideal I in U generated by the relations. Thus I contains all ﬁnite
      linear combinations of terms of the form
                                            A(Φ( f )∗ − Φ( f ))B
      as A and B range over U and f ranges over C0∞ (M), and similar terms obtained from the other
      relations, and all terms obtained from these by applying ∗. Recall that a two-sided ∗-ideal is a
      subspace of the algebra that is stable under multiplication by algebra elements on either side,
      and under the ∗-operation.
    • The algebra A(M) is deﬁned as the quotient U/I, namely, the vector space quotient, equipped
      with product and ∗-operations so that
                          [A][B] = [AB],        [A]∗ = [A∗ ],      1A(M) = [1U ].
      One may check that the fact that I is a two sided ∗-ideal guarantees that these operations are
      well-deﬁned (independent of the choice of representatives).
    • For future reference: let B be another algebra obtained as a quotient B = V/J , where J
      is a two-sided ∗-ideal in a unital ∗-algebra V. Then any function mapping the Φ( f ) into
      V extends uniquely to a unit-preserving ∗-homomorphism from U to V, and induces a
      unit-preserving ∗-homomorphism from A(M) to B, provided every element of I is mapped
      into J , i.e., the map on generators is compatible with the relevant relations.

                                                 43
C Fock space
Let H be a complex Hilbert space. As usual, H ⊙n denotes the n’th symmetric tensor power of H ,
with H ⊙0 = C, whereupon the bosonic Fock space over H is
                                                        ∞
                                                        Ê
                                            F(H ) =            H ⊙n .
                                                         n=0

Thus, a typical Fock space vector is a sequence Ψ = (Ψn )n∈N0 , where Ψn ∈ H ⊙n is called the
n-particle component of Ψ. In particular the Fock vacuum vector is Ω = (1, 0, . . .), and the number
operator N is deﬁned by
                                        (NΨ)n = nΨn      n ∈ N0
                                              Í∞ 2
on the domain of all Ψ ∈ F(H ) for which n=0 n kΨn k 2 < ∞. We will describe the annihilation
and creation operators and the number operator on F(H ) in the basis-free notation used in Sec. 4.3.
See references [BR97, §5.2.1] and [RS75, §X.7] for more details.
    In this framework, each ψ ∈ H labels annihilation and creation operators a(ψ) and a∗ (ψ) on
F(H ), with ψ 7→ a(ψ) being antilinear, and ψ 7→ a∗ (ψ) := a(ψ)∗ being linear in ψ. These operators
are unbounded and have to be deﬁned on suitable dense domains within F(H ), which may be taken
as the domain of N 1/2 , i.e., those Ψ ∈ F(H ) for which ∞          2
                                                        Í
                                                          n=0 nkΨn k < ∞. The annihilation operator
acts (on vectors in the domain) by
                                                √
                                     (a(ϕ)Ψ)n = n + 1ℓn+1 (ϕ)(Ψn+1 )

where ℓn+1(ϕ) : H ⊗(n+1) → H ⊗n is deﬁned by

                        ℓn+1 (ϕ)(ψ1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ ψn+1 ) = hϕ|ψ1 iψ2 ⊗ · · · ⊗ ψn+1

and restricts to a map H ⊙(n+1) → H ⊙n . It follows in particular that a(ϕ)Ω = 0 for all ϕ ∈ H . One
may check that the adjoint operators obey
                                                    √
                (a∗ (ϕ)Ψ)0 = 0,    (a∗ (ϕ)Ψ)n+1 = n + 1Sn+1(ϕ ⊗ Ψn ),         n ∈ N0

where Sn+1 is the orthogonal projection onto H ⊙(n+1) in H ⊗(n+1) . Acting on vectors Ψ in the domain
of N, the canonical commutation relations hold in the form

                                    [a(ψ), a∗ (ϕ)]Ψ = hψ|ϕiH Ψ,                                 (56)

and vectors obtained by acting with sums of products of a∗ (ϕ) operators on Ω are dense in F(H ).
    This presentation of the annihilation and creation operators may seem unfamiliar to those who
prefer their annihilation and creation operators to look more like ai and a∗j . But let (ei ) be any
orthonormal basis for H and deﬁne ai = a(ei ), ai∗ = a(ei )∗ = a∗ (ei ). Then the CCRs become

                                        [ai, a∗j ] = hei |e j iH 1 = δi j 1

(understood as acting on a suitable domain) and of course ai Ω = a(ei )Ω = 0, which provides a
set of annihilation and creation operators labelled by a discrete index. At least formally (because
inﬁnite sums of unbounded operators should be handled with care)
                                  Õ                          Õ
                           a(ψ) =     hψ|ei iai,    a∗ (ϕ) =    hei |ϕiai∗ .
                                    i                                    i

The advantage of the basis-independent approach is that it does not give any basis a privileged
status, and avoids the need for inﬁnite series of the type just given if changing basis, for example.

                                                       44
The number operator can also be related to the annihilation and operators in the basis-independent
form – see [BR97, §5.2.3].
    It is also common in QFT to use annihilation and creation operators indexed by a continuous
momentum variables, in situations where H is a space of square-integrable functions of momentum.
This is essentially a matter of using a continuuum-normalised ‘improper basis’ for H , but one
should be aware that, while a(k) does deﬁne an (unbounded) operator, it is suﬃciently poorly-
behaved that it does not have a densely deﬁned operator adjoint. Nonetheless, any normal-ordered
string a∗ (k 1 ) · · · a∗ (k m )a(k ′1 ) · · · a(k ′n ) can be given meaning as a quadratic form, that is, deﬁning
its matrix elements as

          hΨ|a∗ (k 1 ) · · · a∗ (k m )a(k ′1 ) · · · a(k ′n )Ψ′i := ha(k m ) · · · a(k 1 )Ψ|a(k ′1 ) · · · a(k ′n )Ψ′i

on suitable vectors Ψ, Ψ′ ∈ F(H ). For more on this viewpoint, see [RS75, §X.7].


References
[Ara99]     Huzihiro Araki, Mathematical theory of quantum fields, International Series of Monographs on
            Physics, vol. 101, Oxford University Press, New York, 1999, Translated from the 1993 Japanese
            original by Ursula Carow-Watamura. MR 1799198

[BDF87]     D. Buchholz, C. D’Antoni, and K. Fredenhagen, The universal structure of local algebras, Comm.
            Math. Phys. 111 (1987), 123–135. MR 896763 (88j:46055)

[BDFY15] Romeo Brunetti, Claudio Dappiaggi, Klaus Fredenhagen, and Jakob Yngvason (eds.), Advances
         in algebraic quantum field theory, Mathematical Physics Studies, Springer International Publish-
         ing, 2015.

[BF82]      D. Buchholz and K. Fredenhagen, Locality and the structure of particle states, Commun. Math.
            Phys. 84 (1982), no. 1, 1–54.

[BFV03]     R. Brunetti, K. Fredenhagen, and R. Verch, The generally covariant locality principle—A new
            paradigm for local quantum field theory, Commun. Math. Phys. 237 (2003), 31–68.

[BGP07]     Christian Bär, Nicolas Ginoux, and Frank Pfäﬄe, Wave equations on Lorentzian manifolds and
            quantization, European Mathematical Society (EMS), Zürich, 2007.

[BR87]      Ola Bratteli and Derek W. Robinson, Operator algebras and quantum statistical mechanics.
            1, second ed., Texts and Monographs in Physics, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1987, C ∗- and
            W ∗ -algebras, symmetry groups, decomposition of states. MR 887100

[BR97]              , Operator algebras and quantum statistical mechanics. 2, second ed., Texts and Mono-
            graphs in Physics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1997, Equilibrium states. Models in quantum statistical
            mechanics. MR 1441540

[BR14]      D. Buchholz and J. E. Roberts, New light on infrared problems: sectors, statistics, symmetries
            and spectrum, Communications in Mathematical Physics 330 (2014), no. 3, 935–972.

[DDFL87] C. D’Antoni, S. Doplicher, K. Fredenhagen, and R. Longo, Convergence of local charges and
         continuity properties of W ∗-inclusions, Comm. Math. Phys. 110 (1987), 325–348. MR 888004
         (88h:81078)

[DHR69a] S. Doplicher, R. Haag, and J. E. Roberts, Fields, observables and gauge transformations. I,
         Commun. Math. Phys. 13 (1969), no. 1, 1–23.

[DHR69b]            , Fields, observables and gauge transformations. II, Commun. Math. Phys. 15 (1969),
            no. 3, 173–200.

                                                              45
[DHR71]         , Local observables and particle statistics I, Commun. Math. Phys. 23 (1971), no. 3,
          199–230.

[DHR74]            , Local observables and particle statistics II, Commun. Math. Phys. 35 (1974), no. 1,
          49–85.

[DL84]    S. Doplicher and R. Longo, Standard and split inclusions of von Neumann algebras, Invent.
          Math. 75 (1984), 493–536. MR 735338 (86h:46095)

[DR89]    S. Doplicher and J. E. Roberts, A new duality theory for compact groups, Inventiones Mathemat-
          icae 98 (1989), no. 1, 157–218.

[Düt19]   M. Dütsch, From classical field theory to perturbative quantum field theory, Progress in Mathe-
          matical Physics, Springer International Publishing, 2019.

[Emc72]   G.G. Emch, Algebraic methods in statistical mechanics and quantum field theory, Interscience
          monographs and texts in physics and astronomy, Wiley-Interscience, 1972.

[Few16]   Christopher J. Fewster, The split property for quantum field theories in flat and curved spacetimes,
          Abh. Math. Semin. Univ. Hambg. 86 (2016), no. 2, 153–175. MR 3561860

[Few19]   Christopher J. Fewster, A generally covariant measurement scheme for quantum field theory in
          curved spacetimes, arXiv e-prints (2019), arXiv:1904.06944.

[FR16]    K. Fredenhagen and K. Rejzner, Quantum field theory on curved spacetimes: Axiomatic frame-
          work and examples, Journal of Mathematical Physics 57 (2016), no. 3.

[Fre85]   Klaus Fredenhagen, On the modular structure of local algebras of observables, Comm. Math.
          Phys. 97 (1985), 79–89. MR 782959 (86f:81069)

[Fre95]   K. Fredenhagen, Superselection sectors, 1995, lecture notes.

[FRS89]   K. Fredenhagen, K.-H. Rehren, and B. Schroer, Superselection sectors with braid group statistics
          and exchange algebras, Communications in Mathematical Physics 125 (1989), no. 2, 201–226.

[FV13]    Christopher J. Fewster and Rainer Verch, The necessity of the Hadamard condition, Classical
          Quantum Gravity 30 (2013), no. 23, 235027, 20. MR 3129302

[FV15]    C. J. Fewster and R. Verch, Algebraic quantum field theory in curved spacetimes, pp. 125–189,
          Springer, 2015.

[FV18]    C. J. Fewster and R. Verch, Quantum fields and local measurements, ArXiv e-prints (2018),
          arXiv:1810.06512.

[Haa87]   Uﬀe Haagerup, Connes’ bicentralizer problem and uniqueness of the injective factor of type III1 ,
          Acta Math. 158 (1987), 95–148. MR 880070 (88f:46117)

[Haa96]   Rudolf Haag, Local quantum physics, second ed., Texts and Monographs in Physics, Springer-
          Verlag, Berlin, 1996, Fields, particles, algebras. MR 1405610

[HM07]    Hans Halvorson and Michael Müger, Algebraic Quantum Field Theory, Philosophy of Physics
          (J. Butterﬁeld and J. Earman, eds.), Handbook of the Philosophy of Science, Elsevier Science,
          2007, arXiv:math-ph/0602036, pp. 731–922.

[HS18]    S. Hollands and K. Sanders, Entanglement measures and their properties in quantum field theory,
          SpringerBriefs in Mathematical Physics, Springer International Publishing, 2018.

[Kay85]   Bernard S. Kay, A uniqueness result for quasifree KMS states, Helv. Phys. Acta 58 (1985), no. 6,
          1017–1029. MR 821118


                                                    46
[KW91]    Bernard S. Kay and Robert M. Wald, Theorems on the uniqueness and thermal properties of
          stationary, nonsingular, quasifree states on spacetimes with a bifurcate Killing horizon, Phys.
          Rep. 207 (1991), no. 2, 49–136. MR 1133130

[Lec15]   Gandalf Lechner, Algebraic constructive quantum field theory: Integrable models and deforma-
          tion techniques, Advances in Algebraic Quantum Field Theory (Romeo Brunetti, Claudio Dap-
          piaggi, Klaus Fredenhagen, and Jakob Yngvason, eds.), Mathematical Physics Studies, Springer
          International Publishing, Springer International Publishing, 2015, pp. 397–448.

[Lon89]   R. Longo, Index of subfactors and statistics of quantum fields. I, Communications in Mathematical
          Physics 126 (1989), no. 2, 217–247.

[Pei52]   R. E. Peierls, The commutation laws of relativistic field theory, Proc. Roy. Soc. London. Ser. A.
          214 (1952), 143–157. MR 0051725

[Rej16]   Kasia Rejzner, Perturbative algebraic quantum field theory: An introduction for mathematicians,
          Mathematical Physics Studies, Springer, Cham, 2016. MR 3469848

[RS75]    Michael Reed and Barry Simon, Methods of modern mathematical physics. II. Fourier analysis,
          self-adjointness, Academic Press [Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Publishers], New York-London,
          1975. MR 0493420

[RS80]           , Methods of modern mathematical physics. I, second ed., Academic Press, Inc. [Harcourt
          Brace Jovanovich, Publishers], New York, 1980, Functional analysis. MR 751959

[Sim98]   Barry Simon, The classical moment problem as a self-adjoint finite difference operator, Adv.
          Math. 137 (1998), 82–203.

[SW00]    R. F. Streater and A. S. Wightman, PCT, spin and statistics, and all that, Princeton Landmarks
          in Physics, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2000, Corrected third printing of the 1978
          edition. MR 1884336

[Tho14]   Erik G. F. Thomas, A polarization identity for multilinear maps, Indag. Math. (N.S.) 25 (2014),
          no. 3, 468–474, With an appendix by Tom H. Koornwinder. MR 3188841

[VH52]    Léon Van Hove, Les difficultés de divergences pour un modèle particulier de champ quantifié,
          Physica 18 (1952), 145–159. MR 0049093

[Vla66]   Vasiliı̆ Sergeevič Vladimirov, Methods of the theory of functions of many complex variables,
          Translated from the Russian by Scripta Technica, Inc. Translation edited by Leon Ehrenpreis,
          The M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, Mass.-London, 1966. MR 0201669

[Yng05]   Jakob Yngvason, The role of type III factors in quantum field theory, Rep. Math. Phys. 55 (2005),
          no. 1, 135–147. MR 2126421

[Yng15]           , Localization and entanglement in relativistic quantum physics, The Message of Quantum
          Science: Attempts Towards a Synthesis (Philippe Blanchard and Jürg Fröhlich, eds.), Springer
          Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2015, pp. 325–348.

[Yuk35]   Hideki Yukawa, On the Interaction of Elementary Particles I, Proc. Phys. Math. Soc. Jap. 17
          (1935), 48–57, [Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl.1,1(1935)].




                                                   47
