                                             SciPost Physics                                                            Submission


                                              Bosonic entanglement renormalization circuits from wavelet
                                                                      theory
                                                                      Freek Witteveen1,* , Michael Walter1,2

                                                             1 Korteweg-de Vries Institute for Mathematics and QuSoft,
                                                                       University of Amsterdam, Netherlands
                                              2 Institute for Theoretical Physics and Institute for Language, Logic, and Computation,
                                                                       University of Amsterdam, Netherlands
arXiv:2004.11952v3 [quant-ph] 24 Jun 2021




                                                                               * f.g.witteveen@uva.nl

                                                                                  April 20, 2021


                                            Abstract
                                            Entanglement renormalization is a unitary real-space renormalization scheme.
                                            The corresponding quantum circuits or tensor networks are known as MERA,
                                            and they are particularly well-suited to describing quantum systems at critical-
                                            ity. In this work we show how to construct Gaussian bosonic quantum circuits
                                            that implement entanglement renormalization for ground states of arbitrary free
                                            bosonic chains. The construction is based on wavelet theory, and the dispersion
                                            relation of the Hamiltonian is translated into a filter design problem. We give a
                                            general algorithm that approximately solves this design problem and provide an
                                            approximation theory that relates the properties of the filters to the accuracy of
                                            the corresponding quantum circuits. Finally, we explain how the continuum limit
                                            (a free bosonic quantum field) emerges naturally from the wavelet construction.



                                            Contents
                                            1 Introduction                                                                              2
                                              1.1 Main results                                                                          3
                                              1.2 Organization of the paper                                                             4

                                            2 Perfect reconstruction and biorthogonal filters                                           5

                                            3 Entanglement renormalization and filter design                                            6
                                              3.1 Derivation of filter condition                                                        7

                                            4 Entanglement renormalization circuits                                                     9

                                            5 The continuum limit                                                                   10
                                              5.1 Scaling and wavelet functions                                                     12
                                              5.2 Entanglement renormalization for the massless boson                               13
                                              5.3 The massive bosonic field                                                         15
                                              5.4 Other perspectives                                                                15


                                                                                        1
 SciPost Physics                                                                 Submission


6 Conclusion                                                                                  16

A Review of the fermionic wavelet-MERA correspondence                                         17

B Construction of filters                                                                     19

C Construction of circuits from filters                                                       20

D Approximation theorem                                                                       23

References                                                                                    29




1    Introduction
An important task in the study of quantum many-body systems is finding useful parame-
terizations of physically relevant quantum states. One successful approach is to consider
so-called tensor network states, which are defined by contractions of local tensors according to
a network or graph structure. This gives a natural way to prescribe the entanglement structure
of the state, while retaining the ability to describe interesting states such as low energy states
of local Hamiltonians. See [1–4] for reviews of tensor network states. Tensor networks are
particularly useful to implement real-space renormalization methods for strongly interacting
quantum many-body systems. In one spatial dimension, prominent examples are the density
matrix renormalization group [5], with the associated tensor network class of matrix product
states (MPS) [6] and entanglement renormalization [7], with the corresponding multiscale
entanglement renormalization ansatz (MERA) states [7, 8]. Entanglement renormalization
implements a real-space renormalization by a local unitary transformation, decomposing a
state into a product state and the renormalized state. By applying many such layers one
can build a highly entangled state from product states. Scale-invariant MERA states are a
good variational class for approximating ground states of critical quantum chains and one
can extract the conformal data of the continuum limit conformal field theory of the system
from the entanglement renormalization superoperator [9]. If the entanglement renormalization
unitaries are implemented by low-depth local quantum circuits we will call this an entanglement
renormalization circuit – see Fig. 1 for an illustration. This class of states can be prepared
efficiently on a quantum computer, which makes them a promising ansatz class for variational
optimization on a quantum computer. This latter perspective was introduced in [10], where the
corresponding class was called DMERA. The contraction cost using known classical contraction
algorithms of such DMERA states increases exponentially with the depth of the quantum
circuit, compared to which the contraction of these states is exponentially faster on a quantum
computer. Another appealing property of entanglement renormalization circuits is that they
are robust to small errors, which makes them interesting candidates for noisy intermediate-scale
quantum (NISQ) devices [10, 11]. Entanglement renormalization circuits are appealing as their
depth is logarithmic in the system size, and the circuit depth of a single layer typically scales
polylogarithmically in the desired error, and they apply to gapless systems. See [12, 13] for
some other applications of tensor networks for quantum computing.

                                                2
 SciPost Physics                                                                  Submission


    Unfortunately our analytic understanding of MERA in general and DMERA in particular
is still limited (as compared to for instance MPS). One direction in which progress to analytic
understanding has been made is in connection to wavelets. Wavelet transforms decompose
a signal as a linear combination of localized wave packets or ‘wavelets’ at different scales
(as compared to the Fourier transform, which uses plane waves). This can be implemented
iteratively: In each step the signal is decomposed into a high-frequency component (the ‘details’
of the signal) and a low-frequency component (the ‘large scale structure’ of the signal). The
wavelet transform then proceeds iteratively on the low-frequency component of the signal.
Wavelet theory has many and wide-ranging applications, from practical signal processing
applications such as image compression [14] to mathematical analysis [15]. The procedure of
the wavelet transform is very similar to real-space renormalization, and its original development
was partially motivated by applications in real-space renormalization.
    Recently it has been observed [16–18] that any finite wavelet transform can be written
as a classical linear circuit whose fermionic second quantization gives rise to a free fermionic
(D)MERA. Moreover, the continuum limit can be precisely related to the corresponding
wavelet functions [19]. In [16] it was suggested that a similar result could also be true for
free bosonic systems. In order to formulate what this entails, we will work with bosonic
quantum circuits. This means that we have a set of bosonic modes, and a bosonic quantum
circuit will be a sequence of operations acting locally on these bosonic modes. We restrict
to the subclass of Gaussian or linear optics circuits, meaning that each local operation is
implemented by time evolution with a quadratic Hamiltonian. This is an efficiently simulable
subclass of all bosonic quantum circuits (upon adding non-Gaussian bosonic quantum gates,
however, bosonic quantum circuits are able of universal quantum computation [20]). In
contrast to more usual notions of quantum circuits and tensor networks, the Hilbert spaces
are infinite dimensional. In particular, the usual definition of a tensor network with a finite
bond dimension has no immediate analogue. However, finite-depth quantum circuits such
as entanglement renormalization circuits of the form of Fig. 1 are still meaningful even
in this infinite-dimensional bosonic setup. The notion of Gaussian bosonic entanglement
renormalization has been introduced and studied in [21], in which an extensive explanation of
the formalism can be found.

1.1   Main results
In this work we show that one can indeed construct a Gaussian bosonic entanglement renor-
malization scheme for bosonic quadratic one-dimensional Hamiltonians, using the second
quantization of biorthogonal wavelet filters or perfect reconstruction filters. This extends the
wavelet-MERA correspondence substantially. The resulting entanglement renormalization
takes the form of a short-depth Gaussian bosonic circuit, providing evidence for the relevance
of entanglement renormalization circuits for preparing ground states of (near) critical quantum
systems. Moreover we can relate, similar as in the fermionic case [17], properties of the biorthog-
onal wavelet transform to the resulting MERA state, and we prove a rigorous approximation
theorem for the correlation functions of the MERA state. Interestingly, our formalism is not
restricted to the scale-invariant case, but can be used to construct entanglement renormaliza-
tion circuits for arbitrary translation invariant quadratic bosonic Hamiltonians. Given such a
Hamiltonian, we explain how a corresponding (approximate) entanglement renormalization
circuit can be found by solving a filter design problem. We also give a general method for
constructing such filters, similar to the construction of the Daubechies wavelets. This is in


                                                3
 SciPost Physics                                                                                         Submission


                              |0i               |0i               |0i               |0i




                        |0i         |0i   |0i         |0i   |0i         |0i   |0i         |0i   |0i   Scale/
                                                                                                      circuit
                                                                                                      depth




                                                                         Space
Figure 1: The structure of an entanglement renormalization circuit. Each layer is a constant
depth quantum circuit that is supposed to implement a real-space renormalization. Every layer
takes as input the output of the previous layer and a product state, resulting in an entangled
quantum state at the bottom. Layers further up in the figure correspond to structure at larger
scales.

contrast to the fermionic case, where the only known constructions are for massless (critical)
fermions [16, 17]. Finally, the continuum limit of the discrete system is directly related to the
biorthogonal scaling and wavelet functions corresponding to the filters. For the free massless
boson our construction reproduces various scaling dimensions exactly. If the system is not
scale-invariant, we explain how one can still define versions of the wavelet and scaling functions
which are not scale-invariant.
    A natural application of a quantum computer based on bosonic variables [20] is to simulate
bosonic quantum field theories [22], and wavelets are a very efficient choice of basis to discretize
a quantum field theory for this purpose [23]. We explain that for any free 1+1-dimensional
bosonic field theory, one can use suitably chosen biorthogonal wavelets to discretize the theory
and use the corresponding wavelet decomposition to prepare its (approximate) ground state
using the bosonic Gaussian entanglement renormalization circuit. The idea to use wavelets to
discretize a field theory is quite natural, see for instance [23–25] for some recent discussions
of discretizing bosonic field theories using wavelets. Our approach however fundamentally
differs from these works in that we use biorthogonal wavelets (as is natural in the bosonic
setting), which moreover are specifically designed to target the Hamiltonian of the field theory
(rather than using off-the-shelf wavelets such as the Daubechies wavelets). We hope that our
investigations can provide a potential starting point for the efficient simulation of interacting
quantum field theories on quantum computers.

1.2    Organization of the paper
In Section 2 we give a brief review of biorthogonal filters and wavelet theory. In Section 3
we briefly review the formalism of quadratic bosonic Hamiltonians and Gaussian unitaries.
We then explain the relation between entanglement renormalization and biorthogonal wavelet
filters. In particular, in Section 3.1 we derive a relation the filters have to satisfy to disentangle
the ground state of a given Hamiltonian. In Section 4 we explain how this gives rise to a
circuit, and we state Section 4 which proves bounds on the accuracy of the approximation.
Finally, in Section 5 we introduce continuous wavelet functions, and show that this gives a
natural interpretation of entanglement renormalization in the corresponding quantum field

                                                             4
 SciPost Physics                                                                          Submission


theory. In the appendices we provide a review of the fermionic MERA/wavelet correspondence
in Appendix A, an algorithm for constructing appropriate biorthogonal filters in Appendix B,
an explanation of how to construct Gaussian circuits from filters in Appendix C and a precise
statement and proof of Section 4 in Appendix D. Supporting code used to generate the
numerical results in this work can be found at [26].


2    Perfect reconstruction and biorthogonal filters
Perfect reconstruction filters, or biorthogonal wavelet filters, are filters that decompose a signal
into a high-frequency part and a low frequency part. This is reminiscent of the disentangling
procedure of entanglement renormalization, and in this work we explain the precise connection.
We first give a brief account of the theory of biorthogonal wavelet filters, see [14] for an
introduction. We consider a pair of real-valued sequences gs , hs ∈ `2 (Z), called scaling or
low-pass filters. Often they will be finite impulse response (FIR) filters, meaning that they
have finite support. We demand that these filters satisfy the perfect reconstruction condition
on their Fourier transforms

                              gs (k)hs (k) + gs (k + π)hs (k + π) = 2                              (1)

and define corresponding wavelet or high-pass filters by

                     gw (k) = e−ik hs (k + π)            and hw (k) = e−ik gs (k + π).             (2)

These filters can be used to separate a signal {f [n]}n∈Z into a low-frequency and a high
frequency component, and conversely to reconstruct the original signal from these components.
For this, we let
                                            X
                                f low [n] =   gs [l]f [2n + l],
                                                         l
                                                         X
                                          high
                                      f          [n] =       gw [l]f [2n + l],
                                                         l

and we define

                                             Wg f = f low ⊕ f high .

We similarly define Wh using the filters hs and hw in place of gs and gw , respectively. By
applying Wg again to f low , the original signal is recursively resolved into scales, see Fig. 2. It
follows from Eq. (1) that f can be reconstructed from its decomposition Wg f by applying the
transposed operation WhT , so Wg−1 = WhT and
                                  X
                        f [n] =           hs [n − 2l]f low [l] + hw [n − 2l]f high [l].
                                  l

The roles of g and h can be exchanged in this procedure.




                                                             5
 SciPost Physics                                                                   Submission




                                   low                           low


                            high    Wg                    high   Wg




Figure 2: Iterating the wavelet decomposition Wg resolves a signal into scales. Illustration for
the Haar wavelet filters [19].


3    Entanglement renormalization and filter design
We will consider translation invariant chains of harmonic oscillators (qn , pn ), with a Hamiltonian
of the form
                                    1 X 2         X               
                               H=          pn +       qn Vn−m qm ,                               (3)
                                    2
                                         n∈Z      n,m∈Z

where Vnm = Vn−m defines a positive definite symmetric matrix. The ground state of such a
quadratic Hamiltonian is a Gaussian state, determined by the dispersion relation ω(k) of the
Hamiltonian. We study Gaussian circuits that map an unentangled state to the entangled
ground state of a translation invariant Hamiltonian (or conversely, disentangle P    the ground
state toP an unentangled state). We consider Gaussian maps defined by q̃n = m Anm qm ,
p̃n = m Bnm pm . This preserves the canonical commutation relations if and only if the
matrices A and B are such that B = (AT )−1 . By a Gaussian circuit we will hence understand
a sequence of Gaussian maps, each of which maps modes (qn , pn ) to a linear combination
of itself and its direct neighbours. For details about quadratic bosonic Hamiltonians and
Gaussian states see, for instance, [20, 27–29]. In Fourier space one simply maps a product
state to the state with dispersion relation ω(k) by appropriately ‘squeezing’ each Fourier mode.
However, this is a very non-local operation, whereas we are interested in a procedure that
is local in real space. For more discussion of this point and variational algorithms to find
Gaussian entanglement renormalization maps, see [21].
     Since Wg−1 = WhT the map W = Wg ⊕ Wh defines a Gaussian map for any pair of biorthog-
onal wavelet filters (g, h). This has the structure of a layer of entanglement renormalization,
filtering out the high frequency modes. However, we need to choose the filters g and h such
that W actually disentangles the state, and the wavelet output is unentangled. If we normalize
the dispersion relation such that ω(π) = 1, then the condition for the wavelet output to be
disentangled is that the Fourier transforms of the filters satisfy

                                         gw (k) = ω(k)hw (k).                                   (4)

Intuitively, what happens is that W separates the bosonic modes in high frequency and low
frequency modes, and Eq. (4) makes sure that the high frequency modes are not entangled to

                                                  6
 SciPost Physics                                                                       Submission


the low frequency modes in the ground state. We derive this condition below in Section 3.1.
The scaling (low frequency) modes are again mapped to a Gaussian state, possibly with a
different dispersion relation. We can now recursively apply the same construction to the scaling
output, as in Fig. 1, now with the renormalized dispersion relation, given by

                                     ω(k) 7→ ω k2 ω k2 + π ,
                                                         
                                                                                             (5)

precomposed with a ‘squeezing’ normalization layer to ensure the normalization ω(π) = 1
before we apply the wavelet decomposition. We will later see this procedure can be decomposed
as a circuit, see Fig. 3.
     While we motivated the procedure from the perspective of disentangling a given entangled
state, the resulting circuit can also be used in the opposite direction, to prepare the ground
state by applying the circuit to a product state, thus realizing the state as a bosonic MERA
state. A paradigmatic example is the harmonic chain,
                                       1 X 2                 1              
                                 H=              pn + m2 qn2 + (qn − qn+1 )2 ,                        (6)
                                       2                      4
                                           n∈Z
                                                 q
which has dispersion relation ω(k) = m2 + sin2 k2 . In particular, the massless harmonic
                                                                

chain is gapless and has dispersion relation ω(k) = |sin( k2 )|. For the latter, Eq. (5) amounts
to ω(k) 7→ |sin( k4 ) cos( k4 )| = 12 sin( k2 ), so the dispersion relation is invariant under the renor-
malization step if we include the subsequent normalization. Hence the state on the scaling
output of the entanglement renormalization will be the same after any number of layers. This
implies that we can keep iterating the same entanglement renormalization layer with identical
filters at each layer, giving a scale-invariant bosonic entanglement renormalization procedure
for the massless harmonic chain.
     In the massive case, the mass renormalizes as
                                                       p
                                                m 7→ 2 m2 + m4 .                                      (7)

This is a relevant perturbation to the massless chain [21], and with increasing number of layers
the dispersion relation becomes flat; correspondingly we can let the filters at the deeper layers
approach orthogonal wavelet filters.

3.1    Derivation of filter condition
We will now derive Eq. (4). The ground state of the Hamiltonian in Eq. (3) is completely
determined by its covariance matrix γ = γ q ⊕ γ p , whose Fourier transform is given by
                                                        1
                                            γ q (k) =
                                                      2ω(k)
                                                                                                     (8)
                                                      ω(k)
                                            γ p (k) =      .
                                                       2
The covariance matrix of an unentangled (uncorrelated) product state is 12 1. Recall that
any symplectic linear map S on the set of modes (qn , pn ) defines a unitary map which maps
                                                                           −1
Gaussian states to Gaussian states. Under a map of the form A ⊕ AT             the covariance
matrix transforms as
                                   γ q 7→ Aγ q AT
                                               −1 p −1
                                   γ p 7→ AT      γ A .

                                                   7
 SciPost Physics                                                                                Submission


    We first normalize
                    p such thatp     ω(π) = 1, which can be implemented by the symplectic
(squeezing) map ( ω(π)1) ⊕ (1/ ω(π)1). Suppose we have filters (g, h) satisfying Eq. (4),
then W = Wg ⊕ Wh disentangles the ground state. To see that this is indeed true, we compute
the result of applying the wavelet decomposition map to the ground state covariance matrix
γ = γ q ⊕ γ p given in terms of the dispersion relation by Eq. (8). For this, we remark that from
gw (k) = ω(k)hw (k) it follows that hs (k) = ω(k + π)gs (k). Then,

                           ω(k)hw (k)f high (2k) = gw (k)f high (2k),
                             ω(k)hs (k)f low (2k) = gs (k)ω (1) (2k)f low (2k),

where ω (1) is the renormalized dispersion relation on the scaling output defined in Eq. (5) in
the main text. This shows that ω(k)WhT = WgT (ω (1) ⊕ 1) and hence

                                                                1               1
                           Wh γ p WhT = Wh WgT (γ p,(1) ⊕         1) = γ p,(1) ⊕ 1
                                                                2               2
                                         1
                            γ p,(1) (k) = ω (1) (k).
                                         2
Similarly, it holds that
                                                                       1
                                        Wg γ q WgT = γ q,(1) ⊕           1
                                                                       2
                                                               1
                                         γ q,(1) (k) =                  .
                                                           2ω (1) (k)
We thus see that W has unentangled the high-frequency modes to a product state, and the
low frequency modes are renormalized to have a new dispersion relation ω (1) given by Eq. (5).
    The full entanglement renormalization circuit consists of repeated applications of such
layers. To introduce some notation, we let ω (l) be the dispersion relation after l layers of
renormalization, recursively defined by (cf. Eq. (5), note that we first normalize the dispersion
relation by a factor ω (l) (π))

                                                   ω (l) ( k2 ) ω (l) ( k2 + π)
                                   ω (l+1) (k) =                                .                        (9)
                                                   ω (l) (π) ω (l) (π)

The normalization by ω (l) (π) could also  √ be absorbed in the filters, but we would like the
filters to be such that g(0) = h(0) = 2, as is standard in the signal processing literature
and convenient for the analysis. Then at the l-th layer we need filters g (l) , h(l) satisfying
  (l)       (l) (k) (l)
gw (k) = ωω(l) (π) hw (k) (cf. Eq. (4)), and we let
                                                     q
                                        Rg(l) = Wg(l) ω (l) (π),
                                                                   1                                    (10)
                                        Rh(l) = Wh(l) p                     .
                                                              ω (l) (π)
                                                                                    (L)   (L)          (L)
Finally, we define the L-layer renormalization map as R(L) = Rg ⊕ Rh , where Ra =
(Ra(L−1) ⊕ 1⊕(L−1) ) ◦ . . . ◦ (Ra(1) ⊕ 1) ◦ Ra(0) for a = g, h. Then, R(L) maps the state with
dispersion relation ω to a product state with covariance matrix 12 1 on the L high frequency
levels, and a state with dispersion relation ω (L) on the remaining low frequency level.


                                                       8
 SciPost Physics                                                                        Submission




                                                          a1
                                                     a2
                            W
                                                          a3
                         squeezing




Figure 3: Decomposition of a single layer of the entanglement renormalization map R(1) as
a circuit. The wavelet transform W = Wg ⊕ Wh is decomposed as a circuit with two-local
                                                                1          1
gates ai , and follows the bottom layer which squeezes by ω(π) 2 ⊕ ω(π)− 2 to normalize the
dispersion relation. This figure can be interpreted both as a linear circuit implementing a
symplectic transformation, and as its second quantization, which is a bosonic Gaussian circuit.


4    Entanglement renormalization circuits
If g and h are FIR filters of size 2M , we show in Appendix C that W gives rise to a Gaussian
circuit of depth M that maps the low-frequency modes to the odd sublattice and the high-
frequency modes to the even sublattice as shown in Fig. 3. This is exactly the structure of
an entanglement renormalization circuit. The converse to this construction is also true: any
Gaussian entanglement renormalization circuit as described above arises in this way.
    When using a finite depth circuit, we may not be able to satisfy the relation in Eq. (4)
exactly if ω(k) is not a ratio of trigonometric polynomials. In particular, this is the case for
the harmonic chain. In this case we can still hope to approximate the dispersion relation, and
correspondingly prepare a state that is close the true ground state. This raises two interesting
questions. Firstly, the existence of filters that approximately satisfy Eq. (4) is not clear. In
Appendix B we describe an explicit procedure for constructing such filters. Secondly, one can
wonder whether a good approximation of the dispersion relation at the level of a single layer
will indeed give rise to a good approximation of the ground state. Fortunately, the structure
of entanglement renormalization is remarkably robust to small errors [10, 30], and in [17] a
robustness result for wavelet based fermionic entanglement renormalization was proven. The
bosonic setting is somewhat different, as the Hilbert spaces are infinite dimensional. We
will now discuss that when the family of filters has a well-defined ‘continuum limit’, we can
nevertheless prove a rigorous approximation theorem.
    We would like to bound the approximation error when using L layers of entanglement
renormalization. Suppose we are given a family of filter pairs (g (l) , h(l) ) for l = 1, . . . , L, where
the l-th pair represents the l-th layer such that

                            (l)         ω (l) (k) (l)
                           gw   (k) −            h (k) ≤ ε     ∀l = 1, . . . , L,                   (11)
                                        ω (l) (π) w

so they approximately reproduce the dispersion relation at each layer (up to normalization).
Moreover, we need these families of filters to give rise to a ‘stable’ wavelet decomposition, in
the sense that many iterations of the decomposition maps yield a uniformly bounded map.
This is a standard assumption in wavelet theory. If we are only interested in an approximation,


                                                    9
 SciPost Physics                                                                       Submission


and the theory flows to either a critical theory or a trivial theory we only need a small number
of ‘transition layers’ and can pick fixed filters (g (l) , h(l) ) = (g, h) for large l. In Appendix D, we
prove a general approximation theorem in this setting, which applies to an arbitrary quadratic
Hamiltonian. We measure the error in the two-point functions hpi pj i and hqi qj i (or covariance
matrix). In the particular case of the harmonic chain in Eq. (6), our result specializes as
follows.
Theorem (Informal). For the harmonic chain with mass m, the approximation error using
the MERA state resulting from L layers of entanglement renormalization is bounded by
                                                        L                  p
                |hpi pj iexact − hpi pj iMERA | ≤ O(2− 2 ) + O(ε log 1ε ) m2 + 1,
                                                        L                  1
                 |hqi qj iexact − hqi qj iMERA | ≤ O(2− 2 ) + O(ε log 1ε )    ,
                                                                            m
the latter assuming m > 0. In the massless case, the latter bound is replaced by
                                                        L
                 |hqi qj iexact − hqi qj iMERA | ≤ O(2− 2 ) + O(ε log 1ε
                                                                         p
                                                                              |i − j|.
    In the massless case, there is an IR divergence and hqi qj i is only defined up to a constant,
so we define hqi qj i by subtracting the divergence; see Eq. (47) in Appendix D for details.
    The intuition behind the proof is that the contribution of the L-th layer to the correlation
                                  L
function is bounded by O(2− 2 ), so we need O(log 1δ ) layers to get within error δ (even with
perfect filters), while each layer contributes a factor of ε to the error in the filter relation.
Balancing these two contributions yields the desired bound. In Appendix B we provide a
construction of filters g, h satisfying Eq. (4) for the massless harmonic chain. This construction
depends on two parameters K and L, where K controls the number of vanishing moments of
the filters and L controls the accuracy of the approximation of the dispersion relation. This
corresponds to a circuit depth of M = K = 2L for a single layer. In Fig. 4 we illustrate the
approximation result by numerically computing correlation functions of the massless harmonic
chain using these filters [26].
    If we denote by M the circuit depth of a single layer, then we find numerically that ε is
exponentially small as a function of M , whereas the other wavelet-dependent parameters we
have suppressed above only grow polynomially. Hence, the total required depth of a single
layer of entanglement renormalization for a desired error is polylogarithmic in 1ε . This shows
that our entanglement renormalization circuits prepare the ground state very efficiently: a
circuit of depth O(polylog( 1δ )) achieves an accuracy δ on the correlation functions.


5    The continuum limit
The discrete wavelet transform has a natural continuum limit, in terms of continuous scaling
and wavelet functions. This gives a way to interpret the continuous limit of the entanglement
renormalization maps. In the following, we demonstrate that the scaling functions are a
natural UV cut-off that is compatible with the entanglement renormalization circuits, and in
the critical case we find that we can reproduce certain conformal data exactly from a single
layer of renormalization. We consider the free boson, described by bosonic fields φ(x), π(x)
and Hamiltonian                   Z
                                1                                   2
                           H=        dx π(x)2 + m2 φ(x)2 + ∂φ(x) .
                                2
We are particularly interested in the massless case, which gives rise to a conformal field theory.

                                                   10
 SciPost Physics                                                                                         Submission




                    0.3                                        0.0                           K = 2, L = 2
                                                               0.2                           K = 3, L = 3
                                                                                             K = 4, L = 4
                    0.2                                        0.4                           K = 5, L = 5
                                                                                             exact
                                                               0.6
            p0pn




                                                       q0qn
                    0.1
                                                               0.8
                    0.0                                        1.0
                                                               1.2
                    0.1
                                                               1.4
                          0   2   4       6   8                      0       2       4        6      8
                                      n                                                  n


                   10 2
                                                              10 2
                   10 3

                   10 4                                       10 3
            0n




                                                       0n
            p




                                                       q




                   10 5
                                                              10 4
                   10 6

                          0   2   4       6   8                          2       4           6      8
                                      n                                                  n



Figure 4: Approximation of correlation functions for the massless harmonic chain by the
MERA. We used the filter construction of Appendix B and L = 20 layers of renormalization.
The former depends on parameters K and L which are explained in the main text. We show
the correlation functions hp0 pn i and hp0 pn i, as well as their approximation errors ∆p0n :=
                                    ˜ q := |hq0 qn iexact − hq0 qn iMERA |.
|hp0 pn iexact − hp0 pn iMERA | and ∆ 0n




                                                  11
 SciPost Physics                                                                                Submission


5.1   Scaling and wavelet functions
The continuum limit of the discrete biorthogonal wavelet transform is determined by the
scaling functions. Given biorthogonal wavelet filters g, h the associated scaling functions are
defined in Fourier space for a = g, h by
                                                            ∞
                                                           Y   as (2−n k)
                                           φ̂a (k) =               √                                    (12)
                                                           n=1
                                                                     2
and the associated wavelet functions by
                                                  1   k k
                                      ψ̂ a (k) = √ aw    φ̂a   .                                        (13)
                                                   2   2     2
Both have compact support if the filters are finite, an example is shown in Fig. 5. Moreover,
we can define rescaled and shifted versions
                                                               l
                                       a
                                      ψl,n (x) = 2− 2 ψ a (2−l x − n),
                                                               l
                                      φal,n (x) = 2− 2 φa (2−l x − n).
                                    g                 h }
It then follows that the sets {ψl,n     }l,n∈Z and {ψl,n l,n∈Z form a dual basis, in the sense that
                                             Z
                           g                        g
                        hψl,n , ψlh0 ,n0 i = dx ψl,n  (x)ψlh0 ,n0 (x) = δl,l0 δn,n0 .

Moreover,                                         Z
                            hφgl,n , φhl,n0 i =       dx φgl,n (x)φhl,n0 (x) = δn,n0 .

If the filters are finite and the scaling functions are square-integrable functions (which is closely
                                                                                            g
related to the discrete wavelet decomposition being sufficiently stable) the sets {ψl,n        }l,n∈Z
         h                                  2
and {ψl,n }l,n∈Z form a Riesz basis of L (R) [31]. This means that we can write any function
f ∈ L2 (R) as                       X g                                g
                                                          X
                                                    h        h
                                f=      hψl,n , f iψl,n =  hψl,n , f iψl,n .
                                     l,n                              l,n
By construction of the scaling and wavelet functions, these are such that if
                                              s[n]φg0,n
                                          X
                                      f=
                                                           n

then we can rewrite
                                      L−1
                                                          g
                                                                                   s̃[n]φgL,n
                                      XX                                    X
                               f=                 w[l, n]ψl,n +                                         (14)
                                      l=0    n                              n
where we find the coefficients w[l, n] and s̃[n] precisely by applying the discrete wavelet
transformation Wh to the signal s. Moreover, if we let
                                          X g
                                    flh =    hφl,n , f iφhl,n                          (15)
                                                       n

                                            flg =              hφhl,n , f iφgl,n
                                                      X
                                                                                                        (16)
                                                       n

then flh and flg converge in norm to f as l goes to minus infinity. See [14] for an introduction
to scaling and wavelet functions and their properties.

                                                               12
 SciPost Physics                                                                                    Submission


5.2    Entanglement renormalization for the massless boson
We now suppose that the biorthogonal wavelet filters g, h are related by the dispersion relation
of the massless harmonic chain that was discussed in Section 3, that is,
                                                       k
                                           gw (k) = sin    hw (k).                                          (17)
                                                        2

We claim that, in this case, the scaling functions defined in Eq. (12) are related as

                                                            |k|
                                           φ̂g (k) =            k
                                                                     φ̂h (k).                               (18)
                                                         2|sin( 2 )|

To verify this claim, we note that as a consequence of Eq. (17) and the relation in Eq. (2) we
have hs (k) = |cos( k2 )|gs (k). Next, from Eq. (12) it follows that φ̂h (k) = γ(k)φ̂g (k), where
                                                    ∞
                                                    Y
                                          γ(k) =          |cos(2−n−1 k)|.
                                                   n=1

This expression implies that γ(k) has to satisfy γ(k) = |cos( k4 )|γ( k2 ), and we can easily verify
             2|sin( k )|
that γ(k) = |k| 2 , which has the right normalization γ(0) = 1. This proves Eq. (18), which
in turn, using Eqs. (13) and (17), also implies that

                                          1     k k
                              ψ̂ g (k) = √ gw        φ̂g
                                            2     2       2
                                          1        k        k  |k|
                                                                               h k
                                                                               
                                       = √ sin          hw                  φ̂
                                            2      4         2 4|sin( k4 )|      2
                                         |k| h
                                       =     ψ̂ (k).                                                        (19)
                                          4
Equation (19) shows that wavelet functions are related precisely by the linear dispersion
relation of the massless free boson.                               R                          R
    We consider correlation functions of smeared fields φ(f ) = dx f (x)φ(x), π(f ) =P dx f (x)π(x).
First we consider the case where we have smeared fields φ(f ) with f of the form f = n s[n]φgl,n
and π(f˜) with f˜ of the form f˜ = n s̃[n]φhl,n , then because the wavelet functions are precisely
                                   P
related by the correct dispersion relation, in order to compute correlation functions, it suffices
to express the functions f and f˜ in the wavelet bases {ψlh0 ,n0 } and {ψlg0 ,n0 }. To see this it suffices
to look
     P at two-point functions, and suppose    Pthat we want        to compute hπ1 (f1 )π(f2 )i, where
fi = n si [n]φhl,n . Then, if we rewrite fi = l,n wi [l, n]ψl,n
                                                              h and we denote by H the operator

which is such that it acts as multiplication with 14 |k| in the Fourier domain, so Hψ h = ψ g and
             h = ψ g , then
hence 2l Hψl,n       l,n

                                                                         0
                                                                      2−l w2 [l0 , n0 ]ψlg0 ,n0 i
                 X                                X                 X
                        2−l w1 [l, n]w2 [l, n] = h            h
                                                    w1 [l, n]ψl,n ,
                  l,n                              l,n                   l0 ,n0
                                                X                 X
                                              =h            h
                                                  w1 [l, n]ψl,n ,   w2 [l0 , n0 ]Hψlh0 ,n0 i
                                                   l,n                   l0 ,n0

                                              = hf1 , Hf2 i


                                                           13
 SciPost Physics                                                                    Submission


which is indeed the correct correlation function. A similar computation holds for correlation
functions involving the field φ. However, by Eq. (14) the wi [l, n] are computed from si [n]
precisely by applying the discrete wavelet transform, and the factor of 2−l derives from our
normalization of the dispersion relation (the ‘squeezing layer’ in Fig. 3). In other words, the
correlation functions will
                        P be given precisely
                                      P       by applying the entanglement renormalization
circuit to the operators n s[n]qn and n s̃[n]pn . For general functions f , we may approximate
them with scaling functions as in Eq. (15) and thus map
                                             X
                                    φ(f ) 7→    hφhl,n , f iqn ,
                                                  n
                                               X g                                              (20)
                                      π(f ) 7→  hφl,n , f ipn .
                                                  n

(the inner product here is again the L2 (R) inner product). The scale l corresponds to a choice
of UV cut-off. If l is sufficiently small, then by Eq. (15) on can then compute correlation
functions using the (discrete) entanglement renormalization circuit to good approximation.
This approach is completely analogous to the fermionic construction described in detail in [19].
It yields a natural way to interpret the continuous limit of bosonic entanglement renormalization
as quantum field theory.
    As an application, we can consider the entanglement renormalization superoperator Φ,
which coarse-grains operators by conjugating with a single layer of the renormalization circuit.
For critical lattice models, Φ has been proposed to approximately encode the conformal data
of the continuum limit of the theory [9]. For instance, for a primary field in the conformal field
theory with scaling dimension λ, there should be a local operator O such that Φ(O) ≈ 2−λ O.
We will now verify that the entanglement renormalization superoperator reproduces exactly
the scaling dimensions of the φ and π fields in the massless case, as well as the scaling
dimension of a number of descendants (equal to the number of vanishing moments of the
wavelet filters), similar P
                          as for the fermionic wavelet MERA     [16, 19]. This is seen by considering
the operators Oφ (x) = n φh (x − n)qn and Oπ (x) = n φg (x − n)pn for any x ∈ R, which are
                                                           P
the discretizations of the operators φ(x) and π(x). It can be easily seen that the entanglement
renormalization superoperator maps these operators
                                        X√
                              Oφ (x) 7→       2hs [l]φh (x − 2n − l)qn
                                       n,l
                                           X          x            x
                                       =         φh      − n qn = Oφ
                                             n
                                                       2              2

where we use that for the scaling function Eq. (12) it holds that [14]
                                 1     x    X
                                 √ φh ( ) =   hs [n]φh (x − n).                                 (21)
                                  2    2    n

Similarly one finds Oπ (x) 7→ 12 Oπ ( x2 ). This corresponds, as expected, to scaling dimensions
0 and 1. If the scaling function    is differentiable, we see that by differentiating Eq. (21) we
           1       h x     P               h
get that 2 2 ∂x φ ( 2 ) =    n hs [n]∂x φ (x − n), which leads similarly to a descendent field
           √

            ∂x φh (x − n)qn with the right scaling dimension. It turns out that if φh has K
         P
Oφ(1) =
vanishing moments (or equivalently, a factor (1 + eik )K in the scaling filter hs [14]), then there


                                                      14
 SciPost Physics                                                                     Submission


exists a vector φh,l [n] with l = 1, . . . , K and n taking integer values on the support of the
wavelet such that
                                  1              X
                                  √ φh,l [m] =      hs [n]φh,l [2m − n]
                                l
                               2 2                n

even if φh is not l time differentiable (note that φh,l is only defined at integer values), see
Theorem 7.1 in [32], and similarly for φg,l . This shows that computing the eigenvalues of the
entanglement renormalization superoperator Φ will yield the eigenvalues of K descendants
of the φ and π fields. At this point we observe that a wavelet filter leading to K vanishing
moments must have support at least 2K, so one needs (as expected) a larger circuit depth to
capture more descendent scaling dimensions. For example, in our explicit constructions in
Appendix B the filter size is 2K + 4L where L controls the accuracy of the approximation of
the dispersion relation.

5.3    The massive bosonic field
The free massive boson with mass m can be approached similarly. In that
                                                                     p case, we suppose we
                            (l)    (l)                                    (l) 2    (l)
q two families of filters g and h , now with l ∈ Z and such that (m ) + 1 gw (k) =
have
                      (l)
  (m(l) )2 + sin2 ( k2 ) hw (k) where m(0) = m and m(l) is the mass after l layers of renormalization,
as defined by Eq. (7). If these filters are chosen in a way that they converge to a fixed
orthonormal filter as l goes to infinity, and to a fixed pair of biorthogonal filters as in the
massless case for l to −∞, it makes sense to define a new type of scaling and wavelet functions
which are different at each level l as a generalization of of the scaling and wavelet functions:
                                             ∞ (l+j) −j
                                            Y   a    (2 k)
                                  φ̂al (k) =       √
                                            j=1
                                                      2
                                                                                                 (22)
                                             1        k a k
                                 ψ̂la (k) = √ a(l+1)     φ̂
                                              2        2 l+1 2

for a = g, h as a generalization of of the scaling and wavelet functions defined in Eq. (12) and
Eq. (13). Again, the wavelet functions ψl,n  a (x) = 2− 2l ψ (2−l x − n) for a = g, h form a dual
                                                            l
basis (provided they exist). The behaviour for l → ±∞ is consistent with the fact that the
mass term is a relevant perturbation of the conformal field theory and the theory flows from a
critical massless boson to a trivial theory. As before, we can now discretize the theory using
the scaling functions at some given scale and use the discrete circuit to compute correlation
functions.

5.4    Other perspectives
The idea that wavelet theory should be a natural tool to discretize a field theory in order
to perform renormalization has a long history [33]. As mentioned in the introduction, our
approach differs from other works such as [23–25] which investigate the use of wavelets to
discretize quantum field theories, in that we use biorthogonal wavelets, which moreover are
specifically designed to target the Hamiltonian of the field theory. There is also a different
approach to entanglement renormalization for quantum field theories, known as cMERA [34,35].
This takes a different perspective by formulating a variational class of states directly in the


                                                 15
 SciPost Physics                                                                Submission


 continuum, rather than considering a discretization. In both cases, the correlation functions
 of the theory are accurately reproduced up to some cut-off. The precise relation between
 MERA and cMERA is not very well understood, for instance it is not clear that discretizing
 a cMERA state could yield a MERA. Intriguingly, cMERA is formally strongly reminiscent
 of the continuous wavelet transform (CWT). The continuous wavelet transform [14] can be
 defined for a much broader class of wavelet functions ψ, and if ψ is a biorthogonal wavelet
 the CWT can be discretized to a discrete wavelet transform. Reformulating cMERA as the
 second quantization of a CWT would therefore give a clear relationship between MERA
 and cMERA for free bosonic systems. A starting point could be the cMERA in [36], which
 reproduces some scaling dimensions exactly. However, the CWT appears to break some of the
 symplectic properties of the discrete biorthogonal wavelet transform and it remains an open
 problem to make this connection more explicit. Finally, another reason why the field theory
 limit of entanglement renormalization is of interest is its tentative relation to holography in
 theories of quantum gravity, as conjectured in [37]. The entanglement renormalization circuit
 can be thought of as mapping a system into one higher dimension by adding an additional
‘scale’ direction. An interpretation in terms of wavelets was proposed in [38] for fermions and
 extended to bosonic systems in [39].


6    Conclusion
In this work we have explained how Gaussian entanglement renormalization circuits can
be naturally contructed from (and are in fact equivalent to) the second quantizations of
biorthogonal wavelet transforms. There are a few technical aspects that would be interesting
to study in more detail. First, one could carry out a fully rigorous analysis of the continuum
limit discussed in Section 5, as in [19]. This poses some mathematical challenges. For example,
if the system is not scale invariant then our notion of wavelet functions goes beyond the
standard framework of wavelet theory, and one would have to identify suitable conditions
on the filters that ensure that the wavelet and scaling functions as defined in Eq. (22) are
well-behaved functions and that standard wavelet theory generalizes. Second, it would be
desirable to identify conditions under which the procedure outlined in Appendix B is rigorously
guaranteed to find good approximate solutions of Eq. (11). We note that even for Hilbert pair
wavelets, which are relevant in the fermionic setting and which inspired our construction, this
is not known and a subject of recent research in the signal processing community [40, 41].
    Overall, we believe that this work, together with [16, 17] for the fermionic case, completes
our conceptual understanding of Gaussian entanglement renormalization for free theories as
the second quantization of wavelet decompositions. We hope that this offers a path towards
constructing and analyzing entanglement renormalization circuits for interacting models. One
clear direction is to apply perturbation theory in the wavelet basis. A similar approach has
already been taken for cMERA in [42], where one can also do perturbation theory around a
Gaussian cMERA. Another interesting direction is to investigate integrable models, where we
know explicit solutions for the ground state, and try to formulate these in terms of wavelet
modes. Finally, continuous wavelet transforms might also help illuminate the relation between
MERA and cMERA as we discussed in Section 5.4.




                                              16
 SciPost Physics                                                                Submission



Acknowledgements
We thank Adrián Franco Rubio for inspiring discussions during the inception of this project.

Funding information MW acknowledges funding by NWO Veni grant 680-47-459.


A     Review of the fermionic wavelet-MERA correspondence
In this appendix we briefly review the construction of entanglement renormalization circuits for
massless free fermions, as worked out in [16, 17, 19]. While not strictly needed to understand
the results of the current work, which deals with free bosons, it is instructive to contrast the
construction and state of the art with the fermionic setting. We closely follow the exposition
in [17]. Let an for n ∈ Z be fermionic operators, satisfying the anticommutation relations
{a†n , am } = δn,m , {an , am } = {a†n , a†m } = 0. We work in the framework of Gaussian or free
fermions. We consider Hamiltonians of the form
                                                 X
                                            H=      hn,m a†n am                             (23)
                                           n,m

where h is a Hermitian matrix. The ground state of such a Hamiltonian is given by
                                         Y
                                   |ψi =    a† (fi )|Ωi
                                              i

                                     †
                                              P        †
where |Ωi is the Fock vacuum and
                               P a (f ) := n f [n]an and where the fi are all eigenvectors of
h with negative eigenvalue (so m hn,m fi [m] = λi fi [n] with λi < 0). In other words, precisely
the negative energy modes are occupied in the ground state. The set of number-preserving
Gaussian operations is given by all evolutions along Hamiltonians of the form in Eq. (23). Such
transformations are the fermionic second quantization of unitaries acting on the single-particle
space. That is, toPevery unitary operator U acting on `2 (Z) we associate the unitary which
maps an to ãn = m un,m am .
    We restrict to the nearest neighbor hopping Hamiltonian

                                             a†n an+1 + a†n+1 an .
                                         X
                                 H=−                                                       (24)
                                        n∈Z

As opposed to the current work on bosonic models, so far no general wavelet construction for
arbitrary free fermion models is known, but only for the Hamiltonian in Eq. (24) and its higher
dimensional generalizations. To prepare the ground state of this Hamiltonian we separately
consider the even and the odd sublattice and let a1,n = a2n and a2,n = a2n+1 , and we apply a
phase gate, writing bi,n = (−1)n ai,n . The Hamiltonian in Eq. (24) is then transformed to
                            X †
                     H=−        b1,n b2,n − b†2,n b1,n+1 + b†2,n b1,n − b†1,n+1 b2,n .     (25)
                            n∈Z

This Hamiltonian can be written in Fourier space as
                        Z π            † 
                                                    e−ik − 1
                                                                   
                             dk b1 (k)         0               b1 (k)
                   H=
                         −π 2π b2 (k)       eik − 1    0       b2 (k)

                                                  17
 SciPost Physics                                                                 Submission


The ground state |ψi is now given by filling the negative energy modes (the Fermi sea), which
can be found by observing that for each k the matrix

                                                e−ik − 1
                                                        
                                          0
                                      eik − 1      0

has a negative eigenvalue with eigenvector
                                                            !
                                      1          1
                                      √                 k
                                        2   − sgn(k)iei 2

which means that the space of negative energy modes consists of all functions f = (f1 , f2 )
                                                                                          k
in `2 (Z) ⊗ C2 which are such that their Fourier transforms satisfy f2 (k) = − sgn(k)iei 2 f1 (k).
That is, if f is such a function, then (b1 (f1 )† + b2 (f2 )† )|ψi = 0. We now consider a pair of
orthogonal wavelet filters (note that in contrast to the bosonic case, this is not a pair of
biorthogonal filters, but two filters which are each orthogonal) gw and hw , and we let Wg and
Wh denote the corresponding wavelet decomposition maps, which are now orthogonal, i.e.
Wa−1 = WaT for a = g, h. In particular, this means that we can apply the fermionic second
quantization of Wh to the b1 fermions and Wg to the b2 fermions. If the filters are such that
for −π < k < π
                                                       k
                                  gw (k) = −i sgn(k)ei 2 hw (k)                              (26)

this will allow us to renormalize the ground state. To see this, consider any mode f = (f1 , f2 )
                                            k
in the Fermi sea, so f2 (k) = − sgn(k)iei 2 f1 (k). When we apply the wavelet transforms fi
is mapped to (fi,w , fi,s ), a wavelet and a scaling component. Then one can show that from
                                                                k
Eq. (26) it follows that f1,w = f2,w and f2,s (k) = − sgn(k)iei 2 f1,s (k). We may now apply (the
fermionic second quantization of) a Hadamard gate
                                                        
                                               1 1 1
                                        H=√
                                                2 1 −1
to the wavelet component, which then disentangles the wavelet component of the negative
energy mode. This shows that if we take the the ground state |ψi and we first apply the
wavelet transforms Wg and Wh followed by H on the wavelet output, we map to |ψi to itself
on the scaling output and the product state n b†1,n |Ωi (that is, the state in which all even
                                               Q
sublattice modes b1,n are filled and all odd sublattice modes b2n are not filled) on the wavelet
output. Thus we have implemented a layer of entanglement renormalization. One can write
the fermionic second quantization of an orthogonal wavelet transform with a finite filter as
a finite depth fermionic Gaussian circuit [18]. We may iteratively apply the renormalization
to the scaling component to completely completely disentangle the ground state, and if we
consider the circuit in the opposite direction then it maps layers of product states to the
ground state of Eq. (25). One may think of this way of preparing the ground state as filling
the Fermi sea layer by layer, now choosing a wavelet basis for the Fermi sea instead of the
usual Fourier basis.
    The relation Eq. (26) can not be satisfied exactly by a pair of finite filters, but it can be
approximated. In [16] it was shown that a construction using Daubechies D4 filters already gives
a good result, and in [17] a general method using known constructions from signal processing

                                               18
 SciPost Physics                                                                              Submission


                      Fermions (at criticality) [16, 17]        Bosons
                           P
 Gaussian unitaries   an 7→ m Un,m am for U unitary             qn 7→ An,m qm and pn 7→ An,m pm with
                                                                A−1 = BT
                                    †         †                                   2
                                                                H = 12
                              P                                          P           P                    
 Hamiltonian          H=−        n an an+1 + an+1 an                        n∈Z pn +   n,m∈Z qn Vn−m qm
                                                                with dispersion relation ω(k)
 Wavelet filters      g, h orthogonal wavelet filters           (g, h) pair of biorthogonal wavelet filters
                                            k
 Filter relation      gw (k) = −i sgn(k)ei 2 hw (k) for k ∈     gw (k) = ω(k)hw (k)
                      (−π, π)
 Application     of   b1,n = (−1)n a2n , b2,n = (−1)n a2n+1 ,   A = Wg , B = Wh
 wavelet transform    and apply Wh to the b1 fermions and
                      Wg to the b2 fermions
 Disentangling cir-   Apply wavelet decomposition, then H       Apply squeezing to normalize disper-
 cuit                 on wavelet modes.                         sion relation, then apply the wavelet
                                                                decomposition.
 Continuum theory     Free Dirac fermion                        Free bosonic scalar field (for ω(k) =
                                                                |sin( k2 )|)
 Wavelet functions    ψ̂ g (k) = −i sgn(k)ψ̂ h (k)              ψ̂ g (k) = |k|
                                                                             4
                                                                               ψ̂ h (k)

    Table 1: Comparison of the wavelet-MERA correspondence for fermions and bosons.

applications [40] was suggested, and it was also shown that a good approximation of Eq. (26)
leads to a good approximation of the ground state (which inspired our Theorem 1). The
Hamiltonian in Eq. (25) is in fact the Kogut-Susskind discretization of the Dirac fermion [43].
In [19] it has been worked out how the wavelet and scaling functions corresponding to the
filters g and h have a natural interpretation in the quantum field theory, analogous to the
discussion in Section 5. In Table 1 we give an overview of the analogies between the fermionic
and bosonic case.


B     Construction of filters
Next we will explain how to construct filter pairs that yield a good approximation of a given
dispersion relation. Suppose we are given a dispersion relation ω(k). Let us assume that
ω(k) = ω(−k). We would like to construct a biorthogonal filter pair (g, h) such that
                                              gw (k) ≈ ω(k)hw (k)                                             (27)
or equivalently
                                            hs (k) ≈ ω(k + π)gs (k)                                           (28)
We will describe a general approach to this problem inspired by the Daubechies wavelet
construction, similar to the construction of Hilbert pair wavelets due to Selesnick [40] which
were previously used in the construction of fermionic MERAs [17]. For this, we start with a
rational approximation
                                                   a(k)
                                      ω(k + π) ≈        ,
                                                   b(k)
where a and b are real finite symmetric sequences on [−L, L]. The approximation only has to
be accurate around k = 0. We will make the following ansatz for the Fourier transform of the
scaling filters
                                 gs (k) = b(k)(1 + eik )K f (k),
                                                                                        (29)
                                 hs (k) = a(k)(1 + eik )K f (k)

                                                       19
 SciPost Physics                                                                     Submission


where f (k) is the Fourier transform of a real finite sequence f [n] that still needs to be determined.
The parameter K determines the number of vanishing moments of the biorthogonal wavelets,
just as in the Daubechies wavelet construction. By construction, gs (k) and hs (k) are small
near k = π, and Eq. (28) is satisfied. In order for Eq. (29) to generate biorthogonal wavelet
filters, they need to satisfy the condition in Eq. (1) which translates to

                         s(k)f (k)f (−k) + s(k + π)f (k + π)f (π − k) = 2

where s(k) = a(k)b(k)(2 cos( k2 ))2K . One may try to solve this by letting r(k) = f (k)f (−k).
Then r should be taken as a solution to the linear system
                                    X
                                        s[2n − l]r[l] = δ0 [n].
                                       l

Now, if possible, we perform a spectral factorization r(k) = f (k)f (−k). A necessary and
sufficient condition for this is that r(k) ≥ 0 for all k. Unfortunately, we do not know of a
condition on a and b that guarantees this. The resulting filters (g, h) will have support of size
2M where M = K + 2L. Finally, in the scale-invariant case, the stability condition that will
be required in Theorem 1 can be checked explicitly for compactly supported filters by looking
at the operators P g and P h defined by
                                          k       k       k          k
                         (P a f )(k) = |a( )|2 f ( ) + |a( + π)|2 f ( + π)
                                          2       2       2          2
on the space of polynomials of degree at most 2M with zero mean. The filters yield square
integrable scaling functions and uniformly bounded wavelet decomposition maps if and only if
the eigenvalues of P g and P h are smaller in absolute value than 2 (see [44] or Theorem 4.2
in [45]).
    For the massless harmonic chain, one particular choice for a and b is given by
                                      1
                               a(k) = (e−iLk d(k)2 + eiLk d(−k)2 ),
                                      2                                                           (30)
                               b(k) = d(k)d(−k).

where d[n] is a maximally flat all-pass filter with delay 14 of degree L [40], so it has the
                                           k
property that e−iLk d(−k)/d(k) ≈ e−i 2 on k ∈ (−π, π). In Fig. 6 we show the goodness of
the approximation in Eqs. (27) and (28) as a function of K and L. The resulting filters and
wavelets for K = 2, L = 4 are shown in Fig. 5. We remark that the construction in Eq. (30)
is not necessarily optimal. From numerical evidence in Fig. 6 it appears that the accuracy
of the approximation improves exponentially with increasing support [26]. An interesting
open problem is to rigorously prove the existence of approximate solutions to Eq. (27) with
(exponentially) improving approximation accuracy as the filter size increases.


C     Construction of circuits from filters
We now discuss how to explicitly construct a Gaussian circuit from a given pair of biorthogonal
wavelet filters, and show that any translation-invariant Gaussian circuit of the form of Fig. 3
always arises from such a filter pair.

                                                  20
 SciPost Physics                                                                                                                                                 Submission




            0.8                                                                        gs                                                                                 gw
   (a)      0.6                                                                        hs            0.5                                                                  hw    (b)
            0.4
            0.2                                                                                      0.0
            0.0
            0.2                                                                                      0.5



            2.0                                                                   |gs(k)|2           2.0             |gw(k)|2
   (c)                                                                            |hs(k)|2                           |hw(k)|2
                                                                                                                                                                                (d)
            1.5                                                                                      1.5
            1.0                                                                                      1.0
            0.5                                                                                      0.5
            0.0                                                                                      0.0
              0.0                              0.5   1.0   1.5       2.0    2.5        3.0             0.0           0.5        1.0       1.5         2.0       2.5       3.0
                                                             k                                                                              k
                                                                                     g(x)            1.0                                                              g(x)
   (e)      1.0                                                                      h(x)                                                                             h(x)      (f)
                                                                                                     0.5
            0.5                                                                                      0.0
                                                                                                     0.5
            0.0
                                                                                                     1.0
            0.5                                                                                      1.5
                                         0           5          10         15                                              5              0                 5             10
                                                               x                                                                              x


Figure 5: The results of using K = 2, L = 4 in the construction of Eq. (30): (a) scaling
filters gs and hs , (b) wavelet filters gw and hw , (c) absolute value squared of the Fourier
transforms of the scaling filters |gs (k)|2 and |hs (k)|2 , (d) absolute value squared of the Fourier
transforms of the wavelet filters |gw (k)|2 and |hw (k)|2 , (e) scaling functions φg and φh , and
(f) wavelet functions ψ g and ψ h .




                                                                                   K=2                                                                            K=2
           max|gs(k) |cos(k/2)|hs(k)|




                                                                                   K=3                                                                            K=3
                                                                                               4 h(k)|




                                        10 2                                       K=4                    10 2                                                    K=4
                                                                                   K=5                                                                            K=5
                                                                                              |k|
                                                                                              max| g(k)




                                        10 3                                                              10 3


                                                                                                          10 4
                                               2     3     4         5      6          7                         2         3          4           5         6         7
                                                                 L                                                                         L


Figure 6: Approximation errors for ε = maxk |gw (k)−|sin( k2 )|hw (k)| and maxk |ψ g (k)− |k| h
                                                                                           4 ψ (k)|
for different values of K and L for a filter pair constructed using Eq. (30). For fixed K the
error appears to decrease exponentially in L.



                                                                                             21
 SciPost Physics                                                                   Submission



                    0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0                0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0
                              a1                                 a1
                           a2                                 a2
                              a3                                 a3
                              gs                                 gw
Figure 7: Illustration of Eq. (31), which gives the equations the ai have to satisfy in order for
the circuit to implement Wg .


     Motivated by the fermionic setting it has been extensively discussed in [18] how to construct
unitary local circuits from orthogonal wavelet filters. The construction for biorthogonal wavelet
filters is very similar and the symmetric case has already been discussed in [18], but for
completeness we provide it here. Given a pair of biorthogonal filters (g, h) of support 2M we
will construct a binary circuit of depth M that implements the wavelet decomposition map.
We will assume that g and h are supported on [−M + 1, M ], which we can always achieve by
a shift. By a binary circuit of depth M we mean a sequence of maps A1 , . . . AM on `2 (Z) such
that                                          M
                                      Ai =         (ai )n,n+1
                                            n=even
for i even, and similarly a sum over odd terms if i is odd. Here ai is a two by two matrix.
These maps will be such that A = AM ◦ . . . ◦ A1 implements the wavelet reconstruction map in
the sense that Af = WgT (fodd ⊕ feven ) and (AT )−1 f = WhT (fodd ⊕ feven ) where feven [n] = f [2n]
and fodd [n] = f [2n − 1], as in Fig. 3. By shift invariance this is equivalent to

                                                Aδ1 = gs
                                                Aδ2 = gw
                                            T −1                                               (31)
                                         (A )      δ1 = hs
                                         (AT )−1 δ2 = hw

as illustrated for g in Fig. 7. Now A ⊕ (AT )−1 is a binary circuit, and its second quantization
gives a Gaussian bosonic quantum circuit. It remains to construct the matrices ai given the
filters g and h. We will need the perfect reconstruction condition Eq. (1) which becomes
                                    X
                                       gs [2n + l]hs [l] = δ0 [n]
                                     l

upon applying the inverse Fourier transform. In particular, the vectors (gs [−M + 1], gs [−M +
2])T and (hs [M − 1], hs [M ])T are orthogonal, and so are (gs [M − 1], gs [M ])T and (hs [−M +
1], hs [−M + 2])T . Furthermore we will use that the wavelet filters are derived from the scaling
filters as
                                   gw [n] = (−1)(1−n) hs [1 − n]
                                                                                             (32)
                                   hw [n] = (−1)(1−n) gs [1 − n]
which follows directly from Eq. (2). First suppose that M = 1. In that case we let
                                                         
                                            gs [0] gw [0]
                                    a1 =                    .
                                            gs [1] gw [1]

                                                22
 SciPost Physics                                                                       Submission


Using the perfect reconstruction condition we may now check that
                                                          
                                    T −1     hs [0] hw [0]
                                  (a1 ) =
                                             hs [1] hw [1]

so this satisfies Eq. (31). For M > 1 we will construct the Ai recursively. Let
                                                             
                                      gs [M − 1] gs [−M + 2]
                                gM =
                                         gs [M ]  gs [−M + 1]
                                                       1
                                             aM = p          gM
                                                    det(gM )
                                                    (M −1)
then it is clear that A−1M maps gs to a sequence gs       on [−M +2, M −1] and ATM maps hs to a
             (M −1)
sequence hs         on [−M +2, M −1] using the orthogonality properties derived from the perfect
filter condition In the non-generic degenerate case that det(gM ) = 0, the size of the support
can only be decreased by 1 and an additional layer is needed. Moreover, since AM is invariant
                                           (M −1)      (M −1)
under shifts of 2, it is easy to see that gs      and hs      still satisfy the perfect reconstruction
property. Finally, if we let α denote the map defined by αx[n] = (−1)(1−n) x[1 − n], then in
                                                            (M −1)                   (M −1)
order to see that A−1   M maps gw to the wavelet filter gw           defined by αhs         , it suffices
to check that A−1   M α =  αA T or equivalently A−1 = αAT α. This follows from the inversion
                              M                     M         M
formula for two by two matrices with determinant 1, i.e.,
                                           −1      
                                       a b        d −b
                                               =        .
                                        c d      −c a

Now we can recursively apply the same procedure to (g (M −1) , h(M −1) ) to construct AM −1 , . . . , A1 .
We have now seen that we can construct a circuit from a filter pair.
     Conversely, given a circuit of the form A = AM ◦ . . . ◦ A1 as described above, define filters
g and h by Eq. (31). We can then check that these filters form perfect reconstruction filters, in
the sense that WhT = Wg−1 . If we assume det(ai ) = 1 for i = 1, . . . , M , the wavelet and scaling
filters are related as in Eq. (32).


D     Approximation theorem
In this appendix we state and prove a general approximation result for translation-invariant
quadratic Hamiltonians of the form Eq. (3). We obtain the theorem in the main text by
specializing to the harmonic chain (as explained at the very end of this appendix). Our proof
strategy is inspired by the techniques in [17], with the technical complications that the wavelet
transforms are not unitary and are allowed to vary layer by layer.
    If gs , hs ∈ `2 (Z) are a pair of scaling filters that satisfy the perfect reconstruction condition
in Eq. (1) of the main text, then we can define corresponding wavelet filters gw , hw ∈ `2 (Z) and
single-layer decomposition maps Wg , Wh : `2 (Z) → `2 (Z) ⊕ `2 (Z) such that WhT Wg = WgT Wh =
1.
                                                                    (l) (l)
    Now suppose that we are given a sequence of filters gs , hs as above. Here, l ∈ N for
convenience of notation. In practice, one is usually interested in a finite number of layers; in



                                                   23
 SciPost Physics                                                                      Submission


this case we may choose the sequence of filters to eventually become constant. For a = g, h
and L ∈ N, we define the L-layer decomposition maps

                    Wa(L) : `2 (Z) → `2 (Z)⊗(1+L) ,
                    Wa(L) := Wa(L−1) ⊕ 1⊕(L−1) ◦ . . . ◦ Wa(1) ⊕ 1 ◦ Wa(0) ,
                                                                 

                        (L)         (L)
and write W (L) = Wh ⊕ Wg . We assume that the family is stable in the sense that the
corresponding (generalized) scaling functions φal defined in Eq. (22) exist, are square integrable,
and bounded in L∞ -norm. We can also define the wavelet decomposition maps starting at
layer L0 ≥ 0, that is,
                    0                                       0
                Wa(L ,L) : `2 (Z) → `2 (Z)⊗(1+L−L ) ,
                Wa(L ,L) := Wa(L) ⊕ 1⊕(L−L −1) ◦ . . . ◦ Wa(L0 +1) ⊕ 1 ◦ Wa(L0 ) .
                    0                         0                      

                              (L)
For L0 = 0 we recover Wa as defined earlier. We assume that the wavelet decomposition
maps are bounded. Finally, we shall assume that the filters have finite support. Then the
same is true for the scaling functions. In the case that the filters are independent of l, the
above notion of stability is equivalent to the familiar notion from wavelet theory. For finitely
supported filters there exists an easy criterion to determine this, see [31].
   For the entanglement renormalization circuit, we also insert a squeezing operation between
                                                     (L)
each wavelet decomposition layer, defining Ra(l) , Ra and RL for a = g, h as in Eq. (10). Our
approximation to the covariance matrix is then given by

                                              q,(L) 1 (L),T (L)
                                             γMERA = Rh Rh ,
                                                    2                                          (33)
                                              p,(L) 1 (L),T (L)
                                             γMERA = Rg    Rg .
                                                    2

Suppose the filter pairs g (l) , h(l) approximately satisfy the renormalized dispersion relation at
each level as in Eq. (11). That is,

                          (l)         ω (l) (k) (l)       (l)         (l)
                        |gw   (k) −            h (k)| = |gw   (k) − g̃w   (k)| ≤ ε,            (34)
                                      ω (l) (π) w

where we have introduced the filter

                                              (l)          ω (l) (k) (l)
                                            g̃w   (k) :=            h (k).                     (35)
                                                           ω (l) (π) w
                                (l)                                      (l)
This filter, together with h̃w (k) := ω (l) (π)/ω (l) (k) × gw (k), forms a pair of biorthogonal
                                                       (l) (l)
wavelet filters, with corresponding scaling filters g̃s , h̃s that satisfy Eq. (1). However, these
filters are almost never finitely supported. By construction, g̃ (l) , h(l) satisfy Eq. (4) exactly.
     We now state our approximation theorem for general dispersion relations. We measure the
approximation error in terms of quantities
                                                                 p,(L)
                                          ∆pnm := |γnm
                                                    p
                                                       − (γMERA )nm |,
                                                                 q,(L)
                                                                                               (36)
                                          ∆qnm := |γnm
                                                    q
                                                       − (γMERA )nm |.


                                                           24
 SciPost Physics                                                                     Submission


If ω(0) = 0, then it is also interesting to regulate the covariance matrix γ q as
                                           q      q     q
                                         γ̃nm := γnm − γnn                                        (37)

and consider
                                   ˜ qnm := |γ̃nm
                                               q       q,(L)
                                   ∆              − (γ̃MERA )nm |.                                (38)

Theorem 1. Consider a translation-invariant Hamiltonian of the form of Eq. (3), with
dispersion relation ω(k) such that ω (l) (π) ≤ 1 and ω (l) (k) ≤ Ω for l = 1, . . . , L for some Ω ≥ 1.
Suppose we have a sequence of filters such that Eq. (34) holds for ε ≤ 1, with finite support of
size at most M and scaling functions that are uniformly bounded by kφal k∞ ≤ B for a = g, h
and l = 1, . . . , L. Assume moreover that the wavelet decomposition maps are uniformly bounded
       (l0 ,l)
by kWa k ≤ D for all a = g, h, g̃ and 1 ≤ l ≤ l0 ≤ L, where D ≥ 1. Then the approximation
error of the covariance matrices can be bounded as follows:
                                     L            C
                        ∆pnm ≤ D2 C2− 2 + 3εD log2     ,
                                                   ε
                                       L           C  
                        ∆qnm ≤ 2D2 C2− 2 + 3εD log2      kγ q δ0 k,
                                                     ε
                        ˜ q ≤ 2D2 C2− L2 + 3εD log2 C kγ q (δn − δm )k,
                                                      
                        ∆ nm
                                                     ε
                    3
where C := 4B 2 M 2 Ω.

To interpret the error bounds, we note that
                                             Z π
                                                    dk
                                kγ q δ0 k2 =            2
                                                          ,                                       (39)
                                                −π ω(k)
                                                      sin2 ( 12 (n − m)k)
                                               Z π
                           kγ q (δn − δm )k2 =     dk                     .                       (40)
                                                −π            ω(k)2

As mentioned earlier, our proof strategy follows [17] with two technical complications: the
wavelet transforms are not unitary and are allowed to vary layer by layer.
                                                                                               (L)
    We will first bound the error that arises from only taking a finite number of layers. Let ps
denote the projection onto the first tensor factor of `2 (Z)⊗(L+1) and pw = 1 − ps the
                                                                             (L)           (L)
                                                        (L)  (L)
projection onto the remaining tensor factors. Thus, ps Wa f is the scaling component of the
                            (L)  (L)
decomposed signal and pw Wa its wavelet component. The following lemma confirms the
intuition that, for finitely supported signals, lower-frequency wavelet modes contribute less.

Lemma 1. Suppose we have sequence of filters as above, with finite support of size at most M
and scaling functions that are uniformly bounded by kφal k∞ ≤ B for a = g, h and l = 1, . . . , L.
Then,
                                                 − L−1      3
                                kp(L)   (L)
                                   s Wa δn k ≤ 2
                                                    2 B M2
                                                          2
                                                                                            (41)
where δn is the unit signal concentrated at n.

Proof. Let b denote the filters dual to a (i.e., b = h if a = g, and vice versa). We note that
 (L)   (L)
ps Wa δn [m] = hφb0,n , φaL,m i, where φaL,m (x) := 2−L/2 φaL (2−L x − m) are the translated and
shifted scaling functions. This follows from the fact that hφb0,n , φa0,m i = δnm and by applying


                                                  25
 SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission


                                                                            P (l+1)
inductively the fact that by definition of the scaling functions φal+1,m = n as     (2m − n)φal,n .
Now we can proceed as in the proof of Lemma 1 in [17] and estimate
                               XZ ∞                        L                 2
               (L)   (L)
             kps Wa δn k = 2
                                          dx φb0 (x − n)2− 2 φaL (2−L x − m)
                                      m      −∞
                                      X Z x0 +n+M −1                             L                   2
                                  =                             dx φb0 (x − n)2− 2 φaL (2−L x − m)
                                      m      x0 +n
                                                    Z x0 +n+M −1
                                      X                                     L
                                  ≤       kφb0 k2                    dx |2− 2 φaL (2−L x − m)|2
                                      m                x0 +n
                                                      X Z x0 +n+M −1
                                       −L
                                  =2        kφb0 k2                       dx |φaL (2−L x − m)|2
                                                       m    x0 +n
                                       −L+1       2
                                  ≤2          M       kφ0 k kφaL k2∞ ,
                                                        b 2


where in the second line we use that φb is compactly supported on [x0 , x0 + M − 1] for some
x0 , in the third inequality we use Cauchy-Schwarz, and for the final inquality we use that at
most 2M terms in the sum have nonzero overlap. Finally we may estimate kφb0 k2 ≤ M B 2 and
kφaL k2∞ ≤ B 2 , which yields Eq. (41).

The following lemma bounds the approximation error for L layers as a function of an interme-
diate layer L0 that will later be chosen appropriately.

Lemma 2. Suppose we have a sequence of filters such that Eq. (34) holds, with finite support of
size at most M and scaling functions that are uniformly bounded by kφal k∞ ≤ B for a = g, h and
l = 1, . . . , L. Assume moreover that the wavelet decomposition maps are uniformly bounded by
    (l0 ,l)
kWa k ≤ D for all a = g, h, g̃ and 1 ≤ l ≤ l0 ≤ L, where D ≥ 1. Finally, let L0 ∈ {1, . . . , L}.
Then we have the following bounds:

  (i) For all f ∈ `2 (Z) and n ∈ N,
                                                        0
                                                                                     
                  q      q,(L)                 0      − L 2−1 2 3
        |hδn |γ       − γMERA |f i| ≤ 2D2    εL D + 2        B M max {2kγ
                                                                2
                                                                          p,(L)
                                                                                k, 1} kγ q f k.           (42)


 (ii) Assuming ω (l) (π) ≤ 1 for all l = 0, . . . , L − 1, we have the following bound for all n ∈ N:
                                                           0
                                                                                             
                  p      p,(L)          2         0      − L 2−1 2  3
                                                                                p,(L0 )
             k(γ − γMERA )δn k ≤ D εL D + 2                     B M max {2kγ
                                                                    2                   k, 1} .  (43)

                                 1
Here, we recall that γ q (k) = 2ω(k) and γ p,(l) (k) = 21 ω (l) (k).
                                                                           (L)
To interpret these bounds, we note that kγ p,(L) k = maxk ω 2 (k) , which is typically O(1). As a
remark, for the critical harmonic chain we that ω (l) (π) = 12 , in which case it is not hard to see
                                                      3 0
that the scaling of Eq. (43) can be improved to 2− 2 L .

Proof of Lemma 2. (i) To prove Eq. (42), we first observe that by definition of g̃ it holds that

                                      Rh(l) ω (l) (k) = (ω (l+1) ⊕ 1)Rg̃(l)


                                                               26
 SciPost Physics                                                                                                                  Submission


and hence
                                                                                    1
                                                (L)
                                              Rh γ p = (γ p,(L) ⊕                     1)Rg̃(L) ,                                          (44)
                                                                                    2
where γ p,(L) (k) = 12 ω (L) (k) denotes the covariance matrix defined using the renormalized
dispersion relation. We use this, together with the fact that 4γ p γ q = 1 on the domain of γ q to
write
                        q,(L)            q,(L)
                 γ q − γMERA f = (I − γMERA 4γ p )γ q f
                                                 (L0 ),T             0          (L),T       (L)
                                          = (Wh            Wg(L ) − Rh                  Rh 2γ p )γ q f
                                                 (L0 ),T
                                                                                        (2γ p,(L) ⊕ 1)Rg̃ )γ q f
                                                                     0          (L),T                            (L)
                                          = (Wh            Wg(L ) − Rh
                                                 (L0 ),T
                                                                                           (2γ p,(L) ⊕ 1)Wg̃ )γ q f.
                                                                     0             (L),T                              (L)
                                          = (Wh            Wg(L ) − Wh
for f in the domain of γ q . Thus,
                 q,(L)                        (L0 ),T (L0 )    0
    |hδn |γ q − γMERA |f i| ≤ |hδn |Wh               ps Wg(L ) |γ q f i|
                                              (L0 ),T (L0 )      0       (L0 )  q
                                    + |hδn |Wh       pw Wg(L ) − Wg̃            |γ f i|                                                   (45)
                                                                                   (L0 ),T (L0 ) (L0 )
                                    + |hδn |(Wh
                                               (L),T                   (L)
                                                     (2γ p,(L) ⊕ )Wg̃ − Wh     1          pw Wg̃ )|γ q f i|.

We will bound the three terms separately, starting with the second term. By our assumption
on the filters (Eq. (34)), kWg(l) − Wg̃(l) k ≤ 2ε. Hence, using a telescoping sum,

                                             L0 −1
                   0      (L0 )                                          0                                 (l)
                                             X
              kWg(L ) − Wg̃ k ≤                       kWg(l+1,L ) kkWg(l) − Wg̃(l) kkWg̃ k ≤ 2εL0 D2 ,                                    (46)
                                               l=0

so we obtain the estimate
         (L0 ),T (L0 ) 0      (L0 )  q          (L0 )   0      (L0 )
  |hδn |Wh      pw Wg(L ) − Wg̃      |γ f i| ≤ kWh kkWg(L ) − Wg̃ kkγ q f k ≤ 2εL0 D3 kγ q f k.

The first term in Eq. (45) can be bounded directly using Lemma 1,
                                                                                                                  0
              (L0 ),T (L0 ) 0                   0) (L0 )          0              L −1     3
     |hδn |Wh        ps Wg(L ) |γ q f i| ≤ kp(L
                                             s Wh        δn kkWg(L ) γ q f k ≤ 2− 2 B 2 M 2 Dkγ q f k,

and the third term may be similarly bounded as
                                                                              (L0 ),T (L0 ) (L0 )
                                     (2γ p,(L) ⊕ 1)Wg̃
                            (L),T                          (L)
              |hδn |(Wh                                          − Wh                pw Wg̃ )|γ q f i|
                             (L0 ),T      (L0 ,L),T
                                                      ⊕ 1⊕L )(2γ p,(L) ⊕ 1⊕(L−L ) ⊕ 0⊕L )Wg̃ |γ q f i|
                                                                 0                                    0           0         (L)
             = |hδn |(Wh               (Wh
                             (L0 ),T (L0 ) (L0 ,L),T
                                                                                                  1⊕L )Wg̃(L) |γ q f i|
                                                          0
             = |hδn |(Wh            ps (Wh           ⊕ 0⊕L )(2γ p,(L) ⊕
                             (L0 )           (L0 ,L)
                                                       kk2γ p,(L) ⊕ 1⊕L kkWg̃ kkγ q f k
                     0                                                                       (L)
             ≤ kp(L )
                 s Wh                δn kkWh
                    L0 −1             3
             ≤ 2−     2     B 2 M 2 D2 max {2kγ p,(L) k, 1}kγ q f k.

By combining the three estimates we obtain Eq. (42).
   (ii) To prove Eq. (43) we use Eqs. (33) and (44) to write
                       p,(L)          1                    (L0 ),T (L0 ) 1
                γ p − γMERA = γ p − Rg(L),T Rg(L) = γ p Rh        Rg − Rg(L),T Rg(L)
                                      2                                  2
                                (L0 ),T p,(L0 )  1               1
                                                ⊕ 1)Rg(L ) − Rg(L),T Rg(L) .
                                                         0
                             = Rg̃      (γ
                                                 2               2

                                                                         27
 SciPost Physics                                                                            Submission


Therefore,
                                  p,(L)           (L0 ),T     0     0   0
                   k(γ p − γMERA )δn k ≤ kRg̃     γ p,(L ) p(L  ) (L )
                                                            s Rg δn k
                                         1    (L0 ),T         0     (L0 ) (L0 )
                                       + k(Rg̃        − Rg(L ),T )pw     Rg δn k
                                         2
                                         1      0        0 ) (L0 )
                                       + k(Rg(L ),T p(Lw Rg        − Rg(L),T Rg(L) )δn k
                                         2
As before we bound the three terms separately, starting with the second term. Since ω (l) (π) ≤ 1,
                    (L0 )       (L0 )             (L0 )   (L0 )
we may estimate kRg k ≤ kWg k ≤ D and kRg̃ − Rg k ≤ 2εL0 D2 by a telescoping sum
as in Eq. (46). Thus:
        1    (L0 ),T       0         0 ) (L0 ) 1 (L0 ),T       0           0
          k(Rg̃      − Rg(L ),T )p(L
                                  w Rg δn k ≤ k(Rg̃      − Rg(L ),T )kkRg(L ) k ≤ εL0 D3 .
        2                                      2
                                                                                            (L0 )    (L0 )
For the remaining terms, we note that ω (l) (π) ≤ 1 also implies that kps                           Rg       δn k ≤
                          0
  (L0 ) (L0 )   L −1     3
kps Wg δn k ≤ 2− 2 B 2 M 2 using Lemma 1. We can thus bound the first term by
                                                                                    0
    (L0 ),T p,(L0 ) (L0 ) (L0 )   (L0 ),T         0        0 ) (L0 ) − L 2−1 2  3         0
 kRg̃      γ       ps Rg δn k ≤ kRg̃      kkγ p,(L ) kkp(L
                                                        s Rg δn k ≤ 2       B M 2 Dkγ p,(L ) k,

and similarly the third term, where we find
          1                       0        0 ) (L0 )  1 (L),T (L0 ,L) (L0 ) (L0 )
            k(Rg(L),T Rg(L) − Rg(L ),T p(L
                                        w Rg )δn k = kRg        Rg       ps Rg δn k
          2                                           2
                                                      1                0         0 ) (L0 )
                                                     ≤ kRg(L),T kkRg(L ,L) kkp(L
                                                                              s Rg δn k
                                                      2
                                                      1 L0 −1        3
                                                     ≤ 2− 2 B 2 M 2 D 2 .
                                                      2
By combining the three estimates we obtain Eq. (43).

We finally prove our general approximation theorem.

Proof of Theorem 1. Choosing L0 = min {b2 log2 Cε c, L}, we see that
                          L0 −1           3            0                    L0 −1       3
             εL0 D + 2−     2     B 2 M 2 max {2kγ p,(L ) k, 1} ≤ εL0 D + 2− 2 B 2 M 2 Ω
                                                                           C             L
                                                                ≤ 2εD log2 + max{C2− 2 , ε}
                                                                           ε
                                                                           C       L
                                                                ≤ 3εD log2 + C2− 2 ,
                                                                           ε
where we have used that Cε ≥ 2. Now the result follows from Eq. (43) and Eq. (42) in Lemma 2,
choosing f = δm or f = δm − δn in the latter (and using kγ q δm k = kγ q δ0 k).

    Finally, we claim that the theorem in the main text is just the specialization of Theorem 1
to the harmonic chain with mass m. The correlation functions are related to the covariance
matrices as follows:
                                                             p
                                                 hpi pj i = γij ,
                                                             q
                                                 hqi qj i = γij ,


                                                       28
 SciPost Physics                                                                                   Submission


the latter assuming m > 0. If m = 0 then the latter has a divergence, so we instead define
                                                   q
                                      hqi qj i := γij − γiiq = γ̃ij
                                                                 q
                                                                    ,                                      (47)

where γ̃ q is the regulated covariance matrix defined in Eq. (37). Accordingly, we would like to
bound the quantities ∆pij as well as ∆qij (in the massive case) or ∆  ˜ q (in the massless case),
                                                                        ij
which are defined in Eqs. (36) and (38). This is exactly achieved by Theorem    √     1. We first
normalize the dispersion relation of the harmonic chain ω(k) by a factor m2 + 1 to ωnorm ,
                                    (l)
so that ωnorm (π) = 1. There ωnorm (k) ≤ 1 and we may apply Theorem 1 with Ω = 1. We
write γ for the original covariance matrix of the harmonic chain and γnorm for the covariance
                                                                             p
matrix where the dispersion relation has been normalized, that is, γnorm          = √m12 +1 γ p and
 q        √
γnorm = m2 + 1γ q . Then,
                                                  Z π         Z π
                  1     q        2      q     2        dk            dk            2π
                2
                     kγ     δ
                        norm 0 k   = kγ   δ0 k  =         2
                                                            =              2 k
                                                                                ≤ 2,
              m +1                                 −π ω(k)
                                                                   2
                                                               −π m + sin 2        m
                                                                                        √
so applying Theorem 1 using the covariance matrix γnorm and restoring the factor m2 + 1
yields the results for ∆pij and ∆qij . In the massless case we can use Eq. (40) and estimate

                                                     sin2 ( |i−j|k
                                       Z π
                      q          2                             2 )
                   kγ (δi − δj )k =            dk
                                          −π           sin2 ( k2 )
                                                     2                         Z π             !
                                                              π 2 |i − j|2                π2
                                             Z
                                                   |i−j|
                                     ≤2                    dk              +            dk 2
                                               0                     4            2       k
                                                                                |i−j|

                                     ≤ 2π 2 |i − j|,

since |sin( k2 )| ≥ |k|         nk           n|k|
                     π and |sin( 2 )| ≤ min { 2 , 1} on the interval (−π, π), yielding the estimate
    ˜q .
for ∆ ij



References
 [1] R. Orús, Tensor networks for complex quantum systems, Nature Reviews Physics 1(9),
     538 (2019), doi:10.1038/s42254-019-0086-7.

 [2] R. Orús, A practical introduction to tensor networks: Matrix product states and projected
     entangled pair states, Annals of Physics 349, 117 (2014), doi:10.1016/j.aop.2014.06.013.

 [3] S. Montangero, Introduction to Tensor Network Methods, Springer, doi:10.1007/978-3-
     030-01409-4 (2018).

 [4] J. Eisert, M. Cramer and M. B. Plenio, Colloquium: Area laws for the entanglement
     entropy, Reviews of Modern Physics 82(1), 277 (2010), doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.82.277.

 [5] S. R. White, Density matrix formulation for quantum renormalization groups, Physical
     Review Letters 69(19), 2863 (1992), doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.69.2863.

 [6] U. Schollwöck, The density-matrix renormalization group in the age of matrix product
     states, Annals of Physics 326(1), 96 (2011), doi:10.1016/j.aop.2010.09.012.

                                                           29
 SciPost Physics                                                              Submission


 [7] G. Vidal, Entanglement renormalization, Physical Review Letters 99, 220405 (2007),
     doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.99.220405.
 [8] G. Vidal, Class of quantum many-body states that can be efficiently simulated, Physical
     Review Letters 101(11), 110501 (2008), doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.101.110501.
 [9] G. Evenbly and G. Vidal, Quantum criticality with the multi-scale entanglement renor-
     malization ansatz, In Strongly Correlated Systems, pp. 99–130. Springer, doi:10.1007/978-
     3-642-35106-8 4 (2013).
[10] I. H. Kim and B. Swingle, Robust entanglement renormalization on a noisy quantum
     computer (2017), arXiv:1711.07500.
[11] J. Preskill, Quantum computing in the NISQ era and beyond, Quantum 2, 79 (2018),
     doi:10.22331/q-2018-08-06-79.
[12] W. Huggins, P. Patil, B. Mitchell, K. B. Whaley and E. M. Stoudenmire, Towards
     quantum machine learning with tensor networks, Quantum Science and Technology 4(2),
     024001 (2019), doi:10.1088/2058-9565/aaea94.
[13] Y. Zhou, E. M. Stoudenmire and X. Waintal, What limits the simulation of quantum
     computers?, Physical Review X 10(4), 041038 (2020), doi:10.1103/PhysRevX.10.041038.
[14] S. Mallat, A Wavelet Tour of Signal Processing, Academic Press, doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-
     374370-1.X0001-8 (2008).
[15] Y. Meyer, Wavelets and Operators: Volume 1,           37. Cambridge University Press,
     doi:10.1017/CBO9780511623820 (1992).
[16] G. Evenbly and S. R. White, Entanglement renormalization and wavelets, Physical
     Review Letters 116, 140403 (2016), doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.140403.
[17] J. Haegeman, B. Swingle, M. Walter, J. Cotler, G. Evenbly and V. B. Scholz, Rigorous
     free-fermion entanglement renormalization from wavelet theory, Physical Review X 8,
     011003 (2018), doi:10.1103/PhysRevX.8.011003.
[18] G. Evenbly and S. R. White, Representation and design of wavelets using unitary circuits,
     Physical Review A 97(5), 052314 (2018), doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.97.052314.
[19] F. Witteveen, V. Scholz, B. Swingle and M. Walter, Quantum circuit approxima-
     tions and entanglement renormalization for the Dirac field in 1+1 dimensions (2019),
     arXiv:1905.08821.
[20] E. Knill, R. Laflamme and G. J. Milburn, A scheme for efficient quantum computation
     with linear optics, nature 409(6816), 46 (2001), doi:10.1038/35051009.
[21] G. Evenbly and G. Vidal, Entanglement renormalization in free bosonic systems: real-
     space versus momentum-space renormalization group transforms, New J. Phys. 12, 025007
     (2010), doi:10.1088/1367-2630/12/2/025007.
[22] K. Marshall, R. Pooser, G. Siopsis and C. Weedbrook, Quantum simulation of quan-
     tum field theory using continuous variables, Physical Review A 92(6), 063825 (2015),
     doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.92.063825.

                                             30
 SciPost Physics                                                               Submission


[23] G. K. Brennen, P. Rohde, B. C. Sanders and S. Singh, Multiscale quantum simula-
     tion of quantum field theory using wavelets, Physical Review A 92(3), 032315 (2015),
     doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.92.032315.

[24] F. Bulut and W. N. Polyzou, Wavelets in field theory, Physical Review D 87(11), 116011
     (2013), doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.87.116011.

[25] A. Stottmeister, V. Morinelli, G. Morsella and Y. Tanimoto, Operator-algebraic renor-
     malization and wavelets (2020), arXiv:2002.01442.

[26] Jupyter notebook,     https://github.com/amsqi/pyfermions/blob/master/notebooks/
     bosonic-mera.ipynb (2021).

[27] K. Audenaert, J. Eisert, M. B. Plenio and R. F. Werner, Entanglement properties of the har-
     monic chain, Physical Review A 66(4), 042327 (2002), doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.66.042327.

[28] M. B. Plenio, J. Eisert, J. Dreissig and M. Cramer, Entropy, entanglement, and area:
     analytical results for harmonic lattice systems, Physical Review Letters 94(6), 060503
     (2005), doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.94.060503.

[29] D. F. Walls and G. J. Milburn, Quantum Optics, Springer Science & Business Media,
     doi:10.1007/978-3-540-28574-8 (2007).

[30] J. Borregaard, M. Christandl and D. Stilck França, Noise-robust exploration of quan-
     tum matter on near-term quantum devices, npj Quantum Information 7(45) (2021),
     doi:10.1038/s41534-021-00363-9.

[31] A. Cohen, I. Daubechies and J.-C. Feauveau, Biorthogonal bases of compactly sup-
     ported wavelets, Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics 45(5), 485 (1992),
     doi:10.1002/cpa.3160450502.

[32] G. Strang and T. Nguyen, Wavelets and Filter Banks, SIAM (1996).

[33] G. Battle, Wavelets and Renormalization, World Scientific, doi:10.1142/3066 (1999).

[34] J. Haegeman, T. J. Osborne, H. Verschelde and F. Verstraete, Entanglement renormal-
     ization for quantum fields in real space, Physical Review Letters 110, 100402 (2013),
     doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.110.100402.

[35] A. Franco-Rubio and G. Vidal, Entanglement and correlations in the continuous multi-
     scale entanglement renormalization ansatz, Journal of High Energy Physics 2017(12),
     129 (2017), doi:10.1007/JHEP12(2017)129.

[36] Y. Zou, M. Ganahl and G. Vidal, Magic entanglement renormalization for quantum fields
     (2019), arXiv:1906.04218.

[37] B. Swingle, Entanglement renormalization and holography, Physical Review D 86, 065007
     (2012), doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.86.065007.

[38] X.-L. Qi, Exact holographic mapping and emergent space-time geometry (2013),
     arXiv:1309.6282.



                                              31
 SciPost Physics                                                              Submission


[39] S. Singh and G. K. Brennen, Holographic construction of quantum field theory using
     wavelets (2016), arXiv:1606.05068.

[40] I. W. Selesnick, The design of approximate Hilbert transform pairs of wavelet bases, IEEE
     Transactions on Signal Processing 50(5), 1144 (2002), doi:10.1109/78.995070.

[41] S. Achard, M. Clausel, I. Gannaz and F. Roueff, New results on approximate Hilbert pairs
     of wavelet filters with common factors, Applied and Computational Harmonic Analysis
     49(3), 1025 (2020), doi:10.1016/j.acha.2019.06.001.

[42] J. S. Cotler, M. R. M. Mozaffar, A. Mollabashi and A. Naseh, Entanglement renor-
     malization for weakly interacting fields, Physical Review D 99(8), 085005 (2019),
     doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.99.085005.

[43] J. Kogut and L. Susskind, Hamiltonian formulation of Wilson’s lattice gauge theories,
     Physical Review D 11, 395 (1975), doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.11.395.

[44] A. Cohen and I. Daubechies, A stability criterion for biorthogonal wavelet bases and
     their related subband coding scheme, Duke Mathematical Journal 68(2), 313 (1992),
     doi:10.1215/S0012-7094-92-06814-1.

[45] A. Cohen and R. D. Ryan, Wavelets and Multiscale Signal Processing,            Springer,
     doi:10.1007/978-1-4899-4425-2 (1995).




                                             32
